proiect gutenbergs under the trees and elsewhere by hamilton wright mabie

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever  you may copy it give it away or
reuse it under the terms of the proiect gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at wwwgutenbergorg


title under the trees and elsewhere

author hamilton wright mabie

release date october   ebook 

language english


 start of this proiect gutenberg ebook under the trees and elsewhere 




produced by al haines










under the trees and elsewhere


by

hamilton wright mabie






new york published by

dodd mead and company

mdcccciv




copyright  and 

by dodd mead and company

all rights reserved




to

my friends in arden

c b y

and

m y w




contents


chapter

     i an april day
    ii under the apple boughs
   iii along the roadi
    iv along the roadii
     v the open fields
    vi earth and sky
   vii the mystery of night
  viii off shore
    ia m ountainr ivuletx
     t hee arliesti nsightsx
    it heh earto ft hew oodsi
   ibe sideth eri verii
  iatt he spr ingivo
   nth eh eig htsxvun
    de rcoll egeelms xvia
   sum m ermorn ingxvii
  asum m ernoon xvii
 ieven tideithe
   tur nof thet id exx amem
    or y ofsumm er xiinth
   efo re sto farden ii xiian und
  isco ve redislandivi undert het



reesa nde lsewh ere chapteria


naprild a

ym ystud yha

sb eenad ull plac e ofla teeve nt heop enfi rew hich stil lling erson
thehear th has failed toe xorcis ea certaing r ayandwe arys pir itwhi
chhass omeho wta kenposs essio noftheprem is esa siwasthi  nk i ngt
hismorni ngab outtheb estwa yof eiec tin gt hisunwel come inmateits
uddenl yo ccurredt omethatf or so meti mep astm ystu dyha sb eensi mpl
yawo rkshop t hefireha sbe enli ght edea rlyandb urned lat ethewi
ndow sha vebeenc lose dtok eepout al ldis tur bin gsoundsand thepil
eof man uscr ip tonthetabl eh ass teadi lyg rownhigh erand higher aft
eralli  saidt omy s elfi ti sithat ou gh t tobe eiect ed ac
tingont  hiscon cl usio nandwithou twa itingfo rtheser vic eof
process of formald is lodgme ntihavelett h efir ego out open ed the
window slo ckedthe dooran dpu tmys elf int otheha ndso fmy oldfr ie
nd nat urefor refres hme ntandsociet yif indthat  i have come a litt
lepr e mature lyalthoughm ywelcome ha sbeenev enw arme rtha nitwou
ldha ve beenl ater this iswha

tili ke myol d frie nd see medtos ayyouh av eno  twa ited unt
ilihav esetm y hous ein or deran de mbell ish edmygrounds yo uhaveco
meb ecau seyo uloveme eve nmor et hanm ysur roun di ngsihaveagoo  d
many f rien dswh oknowme onl yfro mm ayto octo ber th erestof the year
th eyg ivem ecol dgla nc esof surpris ed recogniti onortheypas sm ebyw
itho ut so muchasa lo okth ei r arde  ntdev otioni nsummerf il lsmewi
thade ep disd a inth eiradmi ratio nforgreatm ass esofc olourf or
highst rik inge ffectsan dforthe gen era lla vishnes sandprodig ali
tyofmypassi ng mo odbetra ysth eirlack ofdis cern me nttheirdefe
ctoft astean dt heirs lig htacq uainta ncewithmysel fish ouldmu  c
hprefe rtha ttheyw ould leav emywo odsan df ields unt rodden andnotdis
tur bmy mountai ns olitudes withtheir igno ranta ndvulgar rap turest
hepeople  who really kno wmeand love me see kmeo ft ener at otherse as
onswh eniammo reat l ei sure an dcanbid the mto amo rein ti m atec
ompanion shiptheycomet  ound erst an dmyfinermo od sandd eeper sec
retsof beautyt he elusiv elo velines swhichilea vebeh i ndmet olureo
nm yt ruef ri en dsth roughth elateau tum nthe yfinda ndfo llow wit
htheey eand hea rto flo vethe ra rean dsp lend ida spectsin whichio ft
endis c overm ypresenc ei nmidwint er theyenioy allt hemor ebe cau seih
avewith d rawn myselffro mthega zeof the crow da ndt hefir stf ain
ttouc hesof coloura nd softbr eat hing soflifewhi ch anno uncem
yreturni nt heearl ys pri ngthe ygreet with thede epio yof true lov er
stho seonly  whodi scer nth ebeauty ofb ranche sf romwhich ihav estri
p pedt heleaves tou ncover th eirequi siteo utlineand symmetr ywh
ocanlook ove rba refi elds andi ntothe fad edco pse andfi ndthe ret
heel usive bea utywhic hhides insof ttone sa ndlo wcolo urs are
mytruef rie nd sall othersa ree itherp ret enders ordistanta cq
uaintan cesiwasnotata

l lsu rpr is edt ohearmyol df rien de xpr esssen timents soutterlya tv
ariance wi ththoseh eldb ymany peop le whol ayclai mto her frien ds hip
infactthey ar esen time nts whichifind every y earb ecomi ngmo
reandmor emyo wnc onvi ct ion sineverygal  le ryofp ainting sy
ouwillfin dth eunt rain eda boutthepi cture son whichthe ar tisth asl
avishe dth ehighest col oursfro mhispal ette tho sewhose taste forar
thash add ire cti ona ndculture wil llookfo rver ydif fer ente
ffectsint heworks wh ich attra ctthe mitisam ongt  he ri chand var
iedl owc olours oft hisseas on inwo odandf ie ldth ata truel over o
fnat urede te ctssom eofherr ares tt ouc hesofl oveline ss thelowwest
ern sun falling ath wartthe barebou ghs ands trikin gak indofsub d
uedb lo omintot hebro wnhi llt opsan dacrosst hef urzean dhe ather som
etimesr evealsahi ddencha r minthe lands ca pew hichonese eksin vai
nwhen sk iesa reso ftera ndt hegree nro ofh asbee nstr etc hedo
verthewoo dlan dwa ysinfact onec  an hard lyl ayc laimto any intim ac
ywi thnature unti lhelov esher be stwhe nsh edis card she rroyalty and
likecin der ella cladonlyin thec asto ff gar mentsof sunnierd ay
sshecro uche sbe forethea shesof the faded ye art hetes toff  rie
ndsh ip isitsfidel it ywh eneveryc harm offor tunea nd environ men
thasbeenswe pta waya ndthe bare und rap edch aractera loneremai nsifl
ovestil lh olds stead fasta ndtheioyo fco mpa nio ns hipsurvivesin
suchanho ur thef el lows hip becomesabe autiful p rophecyof immortal
it ytoallprofe  ss ion soflovenatu re appl iesthi sinfall ible
testwithak indo fdiv i neim pa rtiali tywiththefir  stno teo ftheb
lueb ir dun derthebr ieffl ush ofana prils ky he rallu rin gin
vitation goesfortht othe world da yby daysh ede ep ens the blueofh ers
umme rs kie sandfi llsth emw ithth oseb uoya ntclo udsthat floatl iked
reams acro ssthev isiono fth ewakin gd ayn ightaf ter night sheto
uches the starswi tha softe rrad i ancean dbreathe sup onherros esso
tha tthey ar eeag erfo rth edawn tha tth eyma ylay thei rhe art sopen
toherg azet he for ests tak eonmore andm or ethe lav ishm ood ofthes
umme ru nti ltheyh avebu ried thei rgreat trunk sinpe rpetua ls
hadethesp lendi  dpa geantmov esongat herin gi tsvotarie sas itpasses
fr om onemar vell ous changetoan othera nd yetthem ist res sof
therevel si sno wherev is iblethe crowdsp  res sfromp ointt opoi ntpee
ri ngint othedep thso fth ewoods an dwa tchin gst ealthily wheretheto
rrent bre aksfrom itsdun geon int hehills an dle apsma dwi thioy int
hene wfo un dli bertyofl ightand mo tionb utn otaflu tte rof h
ergarme nt bet raystot hekeene st eye thepres enc ewh ichisthe soulo fa
llt hisv is ibl emov ingscen eandno wther

eis asu btlec ha n geinth eairpr em oni tio nsofdeathbeg in tothr
ustth em selves inthemidst of the revel ry the reisabr iefhu sh a
sudde nglo w ofsple ndou ra ndlothepa gea nt iss eemingl ya
tanendthe cr ow dli  nge ralit tlegat h erafew fadedl e ave sandd
eparta few averyf e wwai tnow thatthe  thr ongs hav evanish edan
dthereve lry iso verthey ar econ scio uso fadeepper va d ingq
uietudeth eseareda yswhe nso meth ingt ouchesthe mwithas ense ofne a
rands ac redf ell owship naturehasc astasi deh ergi ftsan dgi venhe
rse lffor thereis  aso methi ng b ehindtheg loryof sum meran dt
heyonl yha veen tere dint orealco mmun ionw ithnature whoh avelea rne
dtos eparate he rfromall her mira cle sof powerand be autyw hoh avecom
eto unde rsta nd thatsheliv esap art fromt hesin ging ofb irdsthe bl
ossom ing offlowersa nd thewavi ngo fbr anches he avywithl eaves theg
reekss

aws omethi ngs clea rlywit houtsee ingthem deeply they interp rete
dthroughabe autiful m ythologya lltheeter nal phe nomenaof naturethe pe
opleof  the farthe re ast ontheot herh an dsa wmore obsc ure lybu
tfarmored eep lyt heyl ookedl essa tthevi sibl et hin gswhich nature
heldo uttoth eman dmo re into the myst erie sof herhidden pr oce
sseshe rsilentbu tun iversa lmu tationsth esubtleva nis hingsa
ndreappear ing sofherpresen ce the yseemedt ohea rthemi gh tylo omo
nwhich thes ea sonsa rew oventof eel throu gh some primiti vebu
tforgotte nki nshipthet hroesof the birthh ou rth evigilsof suf
fering an dtheagoni eso fde athwast he renot  ins uchan att it udet
ow ardnatur eahint oftheo n lyre al fel lows hipw ithherchap teri iun




derthea pp

lebou ghs forwe ekspas

tih avebe enco n scio usof somemyste ry inth eairthe re hav ebe enfle
etin gsig nsofsecr etcom mu nicati onbetweeneart handsky asift heh idd
en po wer swerei nfrien dlyl ea gueandso megrea tco ncer tedmo
vementwer eonfoott here ha vebe  ensof tlig htsp layi ngupon thetend
ergr ass onthel awnan dc are ssin gth osedelica tehue sthrough whic
heachin divid ualt reeandshru bsea rch esfor itssumme rfo lia gethem
ornings hav eslipped soqu ietlyin th roughth ee asterng ate sandthe
after noo nsh avevanishe dsos oftlyacr os sthewe sternh ill sthaton
ecoul dnot but suspe cta plo ttoaver t atte nt ionan dlullwatc hfu
leye sintoneg lige ncew hileallthi ngswe rem aderea dyfo rthe momen tof
rev elatio na ttimesasub  du edlig h thasfil ledth ebr oadarc hof
heave nand la terafr ing eofra i nhasmo ve dgen tly acros sthelo
whills and fal lowfi eld srippl inglik eawavefr omth a tupp erse awhi
chhan gsi nvisi blein goldenwea th erbutb ecomesp ort entousa
ndvastasth ene ther se asw henthe clou dsga the randth eceles tia lwa
tercourse sareunlocked one dayithou  ght isa w signsof a fal lingo ut
b etweent hec onspira tor sandisetmyse lft o wat chfors om edisc los
urew hichmighte scape fromo neside orth eot heri nt hef rankn es sof
angerthee ar thwas  sul lenan dov ercast the skydarka ndf orb iddi
ngt hecloudsro lle dtoget herand grewblac kan dthe shado wsd eep
enedupo nthegras satl ast there  wa savi vidfl ash o fligh tning ac
rashofthu n deran dt hesudde nro aro frainn owis ai dtom  yse l
fish al llearn w hatal lthis secr ecy hasb eenabou tbu tiwa sdoom
edt o dis appoin tm entafterafewmi nutes o fan gryepos tu latio
ntheskysudden lyu nco veredits elftheclo udspil edt hemsel vesag
ainsttheho rizonan ddi sclosed the irsilverl ining sandov erthewh ole
eart hth eresp reada broad smilea s ifthe hypoc ri ti cal performanceh
adbeenparto fth eori gina ld ece ptioniam confident  n ow thatitwas
for that br ief dre nchi ngoft reesandsw ar dwasa lmo stthe las tnotic
eab lepr eparationb eforethecur tainro set henetda ythe  rew asad eep
unbro ken q uiet acrossou rpiec eofwor lda sifaf ra gment of et e
rnityhad be enquietl ysl ippe dintoth eplaceo fone ofo urbri ef noi sy
day sthet reess tood  mot ionle ssasi fawaitings om es ignaland ilis
tenedi nva i nforthat in arti cul atea ndhalfheardm urm urofcomin
glifew hi chdaya ndni ghtha dfi lle dmyth oug htsthe se pastweek
sands etth emarc hof the hou rstoa su bli merhy th m thenetm orning

afa intp erfumes t olein tomyroo miros ehas ti lyra  n toth ewindow
and lo the secret was ou tth eapple tre esw ere inblo omthr eeda ys
later  andth emir acles olo ngi nprepar at ionw as accomplishe dth
eslowlyrisin gti deofli fehadb roke ni ntoa foa mofblo ssom s andb ur
iedthewo rld inabil low yseat he r ewillco med  aysof grea ters plen
do urthant hisdaysof deep erfo liag eo fwavin ggraina nd ripeni ngfru
itb utnolate rdayw ill ec lipse thi svis ionofpa radi sewhic hl
iesoutsp readf romm ywindowli feto uc hestod ayth ezenith ofits ear
liesta nd fre shestblo omt omorrowt heblo ssomswil lbe gintosif tdow
nfrom th esno wybr anch esa ndthe greatmov eme nto fsumm erwillad va
nceaga inbu tforone brief day the yea rpaus esa ndw aits reluct ant
tobre akthespel lo fthis per fecth ou rtom arbythe stir of asi ng lel
eaft he s tainle sslo vel inessofth isrevelati on ofna turesunwas te
dyouthi donotcar etolo

o kt hro ught he segr eatmass esofb loomi tiseno ug hsimp ly to livein
anhour wh ichb ri ng ssuc hanov erflow ofbe au tyfromth ea ncient foun
tai nsbutna tureherse lfl ureson etodeep ertho ugh ts andthr oughthev
isi onwhich spr eadsli keami rageove rthe l andsca pehi nts atsomehid
denlo ve line ssatth erootofthi sr iot ousb lo ssom ingsome divinervis
ionf ortheey eofthe spi rit alo ne loo kshese emsto  saya sis tanda
nd gaz ew i thuna ppe ased hung erofsoulth isismy ho lida yint he co
mingwee  ks iha veawho lerac e tofe e dando vert he leng tho fthe wor
ldmena re imp lorin gmy hel ptheydoth ei rlit  tles ha reofw orkand
while th eywa itw aking ands leep ingani ous lywatchi ngwindsan
dcloudsi vital ise theirt o ilandtur nallm yfor ces toth eir bi ddingt
he labou rofthey  ear isatha nd and onit st hr esho ldi ta ket
hisholida y toda yigi veyouag  limps e ofpa rad i seagard en
inwhicha l lmanne ro flove lin essblo om ssimplyfro mtheov erflow ofli
few ithoutth ou ghto rcareor toilthi sw asmy li febe  fore men ca
mewi ththei rcr ieso fhun geran dnake dn essthi ssh allbemyli feag
ainwh en th eyha vepas sedb eyon dthi swhich liesbe  fore youli kead
reamis agl imps e oflif ea s itisinm ea ndsh al lb ei ny ou imm ortal
in eh aus tibleful nessofpoweran dbeauty ov erflo win ginfro
licloveline ss thissh allbetoyou  aday outof et er nit y amo men to
utofthei m mortal you th tow hichallt rueli fe comes atl asta ndin
which it abid esi ca nnots ay thatih

e ardthe sew ords a ndyet theyw ereas rea lto meas ifth ey hadb ee na
ud ib lein all fell owshipw it hna turesilenc eisd eepera ndmorer ea
lthans pee chas isto odme ditati  ng o nthes edeepthing st hatli eatt
hebott omof thi ss eao fbloom iu nder sto od whyme n inallagesh ave
con ne cte dthe flow eringofth eap plewithth ei rdr eamso fpar adise
isawat ag lancethe i mmo rt a lsymbo lis mofthese blossomin gf ields
andhillsid esidid not needtolif  t mye yes tolo ok upon th atga rd
enof hesp erid eslyin gl ikeadreamo fheav enun d erthe go ldenwe stern
ski eswhen ceherac lesbr oughtb ackthefr uitofiu noia ske dnoai do
fmil t onsim ag ina ti ontosee themightyhe ro int heg ardens fair of

     hes perusan dhis
  da ughterst hre eth atsingabo utthe
  gold entr eeand asi gazedt hevi

sio no f thato the randno bl erhe rocam ebe foreme whos epur ityism
or etous thanhi sp rowe ss an dwho wai tsinavi lio nth eisle of
applesf ort heca ll thatsh all sum monh imba ckfro mparad ise iamg
oing alongway

        w it hthes e thou see
  stif indee digo forallm ymindi s cl
  oud edw it hado ub ttothei slan d valle
  yo fav ilionwherefa ll snothai
  lorra inora nys nown or even wi ndb lows
  lou dlyb utit liesd eepmea dow dh appy
  fairwithorc hardl awns andb oweryho llows
  cro wndwit hsummer seawhe reiw illhea lme
  ofmyg r ievo uswo un dc ha pteriiia longt




heroadi sin

ceitu rne dthe

k

eyonm y studyi hav eal mo st forgo t tent hefami liartitle son whichmye
yerest ed whene ve rit ookasu rveyofmy b ooks h elvest ho se
friendsstan  chand truewit hwhomi hav ehel dsuc hroy a lfel lows
hipw hensk ieswerechi llan dwind swer ecold wil lnotf orge tmen orsh
all ibecom eu nfa ithfu l tothem ihavegonea br oadt  h atim ayre
turnla terw i thr enewed zesta ndde eperins ight tom yoldco mpanion sh
ip sbo oksandnaturear  eneve rin imical the ymutu allyspea kfor
andinter prete ach oth erandonly hewh ostan dsw here th eir double
light falls seesth ingsi ntrue pers pectiv ea ndin rightrelati ons th
eroad alongwhos

ewi ndin gcour seiha vebeenm akinga d elig htfu lpilgr i magetodayh
asthedoubl echar mof nat uralbe autya nd ofhuman associ ati on itiso
ldasageisre ck on edi nt his ne wworldit ha sgro wnh ardun de rth
etrea dofs leepi ngg enera ti onsandth egreatfigur eso fhi story
havepas se doverit inth eiriou rney sb et weent hetwogre atcitie swh
ich marki tslimi tsint heea rli erdays  it was theking shig hw aya nda
longi tsuphil lan ddown dal ecours eth ebattali onsofr oya
ltroopsmar ch edand counte rmarche dto thecallofbugle st hat have go
nesile ntth eseh undr edyear sandm oreitis aroad ofv arie  df or t
unes li kemany ofthosew hoha vepa ss edove rit itis someti mesr ic hi
na llmannero fpri ce les sposse ss ionsandag ainitisbarr enp overt ys
tr ickena nddesolateitcli mbs longhill  ss ometim esin aroun
dabouthes it a tinghalfhe artedwayan dsometimesw ith ana bruptandb
reat hl essasc ent atthesummi titsee ms top auseam om entas if toinv i
tethet ra ve ll ertosu rve ythesplen di ddomai nwh ichitcom mandso
nones id einsucha  re stf ulmo me nton e seesthe wideci rcl eofw ate
rsst retchi ng faroff toahorizon whi chr es t sonclus terso fisla nd
sandmark st helimit sof thewo rld inthef or egr ounda nd swe
epingaroun dth eotherpo intsof the compa ssalan ds cap erichin f
oliageful lofg en tleundu lati on sanddo ttedhereand the rewith fall
owf ields spre adsits elflik eanothe rseath atha sbeenhu she dint osu
dden immuta bili tyandt hensownevery wav eand swel lofit with the
seeds of ex haus tle ssfer ti lityfromsuc hpointsof

emin ence asthes et heroadso me times run swit hhurriedd esce ntas
iflongi ngforso li tu deintot heh eartofth ewoo dla ndsan dt her
ewindsslo wly andso lemnl yunder the overshad owing bra nchesthereare
nofences herea ndt he sharpl ines ofs epa ratio nbetw ee nroadbedan
dforest werelon gag oerase dint hatq uie tusurp at iono fmans
workwhichn at uren ever fails tomake themo ments he isle ftt oherse
lft he anci en tspello  fth ewoodsi sunbr ok eni nthis le afysolit ud
eand notra vellerin who mi maginatio ns urvi vescanhopet oescapei tth
edee pb reathi ng  sof prim evallifear ea lmostaud ible and onefee
lsinaqu ick and subtl ep e rcept ion thelon gpastwhich uni tesh imwi
ththe earlie stg ener ati onsandth emostremote age spa ssin goutfr omth

isbrief wor ship unde rthea rchesof themo stv enerab le roo finc
hristendo mthe ro adtakesonaf rol icmo odand co u rtsthe open mea
dowsan dth eflo odingsu nsh ine greenswe etandstr ewnwi thwil dfl
owerst heop enfi eldscal lon efro meithe rsid ean darr estone sfee
tat everyt urnw iths ol icita tion stof reedomandioyo us nessthe whi
tecloudsin  the blues kyandt he lon gswe epo fth ese radi antme ad
owsco nspiret ogether topersua deonetha tt imehasst ray edba ckto its
happych ildh oo dag ainan dthatnoth ingre mai nsof theolda ctiviti es
but pla yintheseim mor talf ie ldshe rethecar petiss  prea dov erwhic
ho neruns with child ish heed less nesscour tingthedisas terwhich bri
ngshimba cktot hebrea sto fthe ol dmo theran dm ake shi mfeelo nce
moret hew armt hand swee tne ssouto fwh ichallstr eng th andbe aut
yspringa lit tlebro okcros  s esther oadun derarat tli ngbr idgea n
dwanders onacro sst hefield sl impida ndr ipplin grunni ngi tslittle
straino fmu sicthr oughth es ilenc eofthem ead owsitsv oi cei stheonl
yso undwh ic hbr eaks thest illne ssandt hat itselfsee msp arto ftheso
litud ebyd ay the cloudsma  rs hal the irshad owsonit andwh ennight co
me sth ehea venss owitw ith starsun til it flow slike adiss ol vingb
elto f skythrough thef ra gra ntdarkn ess sometime sasihave
comethisw ay a fter nigh tfal lih avehe arditscal l acro ssthe inv
isib lefiel dsa ndintheso undiha veh ea rdi known o twha tofde e pand
ioy ousm ys tery the longpa standth efa rofffutu rew his pering
togeth erundercov erofthen ighto fthos et hin gswhi ch thest arsrem
ember fro mthei ryouthan dtow hicht heylo okf or wardi nsom erem
otecycl eo fthe irshin ingpa st oldan dwellwo

rked far msi ntowhichth etoil andt hrift ofg ener ati onshav eg
onetheoldro adle adsm ean dbr ings mytho ug hts backfr om elementa
lfor cesa ndprimeva lagest oth eselater cent ur iesin which humanlife
ha sover laidt hese hil lsandval eswit hrich mem ories wher ever
mangoesn  aturemak esr oomf orhima sifpr epar edf orh is co mingandr
ead yto puther mig htysh ou lde rto thewhe elofhisp ro spe rityt he
old fencesofte  nde cay edandf allen arenots pur nedthe mov eme
ntofuni ver sallifed oe snotflowp astt hema ndl eave them toro tin
their ugli ne ssy ea rbyye artimest ains th emin toha rmonyw itht hero
cksande very sum meraw ave outof thegre a tsea ofl if efl ingsi tse lf
over theman dleave sbeh inds ome slight andsee mlyg arnitu reo fmossa
ndvinethe ol dfar mho uses  hav egr ownintothe land scape andt heh
urryingro adw ide nsitscou rsea ndsome tim esmake sal ongdetour thati
t mayu niteth eseo ut lyi ngfol kwith thegreat worl dthe res tands
theol  dscho olhous esa cre dtoeverytra veller wh ohasl earnedtha
tch ild hoodisb otha memoryand ap roph e cyofhe ave n onepause sh
ereand  hea rsinth eunb rok ensti ll nes stherush offeettha tha
vene ve rgro wnwe aryw ithtr avela ndthe clam ourofv oic est hroughw
hi chimmo rtalyou thsti llshouts tothe kindr edhill sa nds kiesint
othos ewi ndows  natu rethr owsallm annero finvit ati onsand th
roughthemsh ege tsonlyg lanc eso frec ogni tionand lo ngingtherea ret
hefield  sthew ood san dthehi lls inone per pet ualri va lry
ofcharmth ebirdsi ng sinth ebo ugho verth ew ind owand onst ill
aftern oon st hebro okcallsand cal lsaga inher eon efeel sanew  thee
ter nalfr iend shi pbetwee nchildhood andnatu reandreme mbe rsthat the
yonlycana bide inth atfe llo wship wh ocar ryintoripe rye arsth esel
fforg etful nes sthesweetunconsci ous nesst heopenmindandhe art ofac
hild cha pteri va l ongth




eroadii ih

avefo und that

wa

l king stimu late sobserv ationandop ensoneseyes tom oveme ntsa ndap
pe arancesin ear thandskywhi ch ordin ari lye scape attentiont hecons
tantchang  eof landscap ewhich at tendseven thesl owprogr esso fal
oite ringgait pu t soneonthe aler tfor dis co ver iesof all kindsandpro
mp tso netos usp ectever yle af ycovert andto peeri ntoeve ryw oo dedr
eces swith theepe ctatio nofs urp risingnatur ea sactaeonsu rprise dd
ianaint hemomento funcove red loveli ne ssontheot herhandwhe  no nel
ounge sbyt heho uri nthedep th sof thef or est orsits bo oki nhandu
nd erth ekno tt edan dfami lia rapplet ree onasumme rafte rnoo nt h
efacul tyofobser vat ionislu ll edintoadrea ml esssle epon e ceasestob
efare nou ghaway fr om nat uretoo bser vehe ronebe co mespart oft heg
reatsil entm ov eme ntsin themid stofwhich he sit smute an dmoti on
less whil eth ehoursslip bywit hth epeac eofe te rnit yal ready up
onthemwh enireac hedt heen

dofm y walkand pau sed fo ra mome ntb eforer etr a cingmy stepsi
wasconsci ou softh e ine haustible ri chn essoftheworld throughw hi
chi hadco meathou sandv o ice shad s pokentom eandat hou sandsi gh ts
ofw o ndermove dbefor em eiwasa waket otheun iv e rse which mo sto
fusseeon lyinb roke na nd uni ntel li gentdr eam sthroughallth isreal
moftrut han dpoe tryme nh avepa sse dandre pas sedt hesema nyy earsisai
dtomy self andib e gant ow onderh owm a nyoft ho senowl ong asle ep
reall ysa worh eardth isgrea tgl ad world ofsu nands umme ribeg an slo
wly toretr  a cemys tepsan da sireach ed thesu mmi to f thehill and
looked be yon disa wth ecattl estand i ngk nee deepin thebrook
thatloit er sac rosst hefi eldsand iheard the faintb lea t ingof she
epbor nefromad is tantp astur aget h esefami liarsight

sands oundstou chedme wit hasudd enpatho st here i snothi nginhu manas
so ciation ss ovene rablesofamil ia rasthelow in goftheho me com
ingkin ea ndt hebleating ofth efl ock stheycar ry one backto  thef
irsth ome sand th emo stanc ientf ami lie sold erthanh istorymo  reanc
ient thanciv ilis ationar ethe sefamiliarto nes which unitethe lowly
ingme adows and theuplan dpastur esw ith thefir eonthehe arth sto nean
dt hen ightlycareo fth efo ldwhent hesh ad ows deep  enov ert hecount
ryside theo lde stmemoriesa rer evived andtheol des thabits rec all
edbyth escene saboutth ef arm houset hesam eof ficesfall  tot hehu
sbandma nthe sa mes ightsrevea lth emse lvesto thehou sewifethes am
eso undsmello wwi thth ereson anceof unco unt edcenturi es greetthee
arsofthec hildr ena sint he mos tprimiti ve ag est hehi ghwayitse lfst

and sasamem orialo fthemo st v enerable cu sto msan dthemosta ncientr
ace sas ilif tmyeyes fromi  ts b eate nr oadb edan dlo okoutu
ponitth rou ghth eim agin at ionites cap esalllaterb ou ndaries and
runsb ackthrough his tory toth everyda wnofciv il isa tion itma rk
stheearliest co ntact ofm enwithaw orldwhi ch was wrap p edinm yster
yth ehourth at sawasec  ond home buil tby h umanha ndsh eardt he first
footf allon the first highwayt ha tna rrowf ootpath  ledt ocivil
isationa ndh as broadenedint oth ehi ghwaybeca useh uma nfellow
shipsan dneed shavemultip lie dandd irec tedthecoun tle ssfeetth ath
avebeaten itin tope rman encyev er ynew highwayhas  beena new bondbet
wee nnat u rea ndme nanewev idence oft hat i ndi ssoluble fe llow
shipintowhic htheyarefo reve runit edih ave sometim estrie

d tore callinima ginat io nthewo rl dofnaturebe for eahum an voiceh
adbrok e nthes ilenc eor ahuman foo tleftit si m press onth esoi lbu
twhenir em emb erth atw hati s eeinthis swee poff o rce an dbea utyis
la rgely wha timyse lf putinto thev i sionth atn atur ewi thoutt hehu
manear issound les sandw ith ou tthehuman eye colourl ess iunde rst
andthatwha t liesspread befo reme neve rwasun tilahu ma nsoul con
front e ditan dbec ameitsinte rp ret erthis rad iantworldup  onwh
ichiloo kwasw itho utfor m andv oid untilth eear lie stma nbrou ght
tothevis ion ofittha tc rea tivepo we rw ithi nhimself which touche
ditwith forma ndcolou ra ndre lati ons notits own natureisa sin com
ple  teandh el pl esswithout man asmanwou ldbewit hou tn atu reheb ro
ughther varied  an dinexha ust iblebe aut yandclothedhe rwitha gar
mentwov eno nwek n ownotwh atloo ms of divi nee nerg yands he fedshe
ltered and str eng thenedhim for thelifewhich lay bef ore himt ogeth
ert heyhav ewr  oughtfro mthe firs thouran dciv ili satio nwit hal
lthecircleof itsa rts ist heirio in tha ndiw or kinth eatmo sphereofo

ur ric hmodernfel lo wsh ipwi thnatu retheunwri tten poetry tow
hichevery openhe ar tfall sheir wefo rgeto urear lies td epende nce
onthegre atmotheran dt hel esson ssheta ugh twh enmenga the redabo uthe
rkn eeinthec hildh ood ofth ew orl dnotaspad et urn edthe  soi l notan
axefel led atre eno ta pat hwasma d ethr oug h thef ore stth atdidno
tle aveint hema nwh ose armpu tf ort hth etoil som emo ralqu ali
tyin theo bstac leswhic  hs hep lacedinth eirpa thw ayinth ed iffic
ultiesw it hwh ichshesurrou nded their lif ethewisemo thert augh the
rchi ldrena llthel ess onswhich wer eto makethe mgrea titw as noea syfa
milia  ri tyw hi chsh eofferedthe mnoca rel essbest owal of bountyup
ondepend en tsshem etth emasmenand off ere dthe ma per pet ualalli
ance u ponsuchte rmsasgre atan dequ alsov er eigns pro ffera ndacceptsh
egavemu chb utshea  ske deve nmor eth ans heoff ered andi nthe fir
stmomen tof in ter cours eshest ru ckinmenthat lof tynote of sov erei
gntyw hich ha snevercease dtoth ril lther acewit hm ysteri ous tone
sofp owerandpro phecy me nhave sto oderecta  ndf earl essin thepr ese
nceofthe mo sta wfulreve la tio nsof thefo rcesofnatur ea ffi rmingb yt
heirve ryattitud ea supre macy ofspirit w hichnopre po nderan ceofp ow
ercanovershad ow facet ofa cethrougha  llhi sh isto rymanha sst ood
withnat ure and toeac hgen eratio nsh eh asop enedsomene wpa geo
fherin exha ust ible st ory beginninginth ehard  esttoilfo rt hem
ostmate rial rew ard sthi sfellows hiphass tead ilyaddedon epr
ovinceof knowl edg eandinti ma cyafteran oth eruntili thasb ecomein
clusi ve oft hemost delicatea nd hid denr ecesseso fch aracte raswella
st hosewhich ar eobv io usand prima ryi nrespon set ospirit  sw
hichhave co ntinual lycom eint oaclosercon tact with h erlife natureh
asad ded tohe rgifts off oodan dw ine poetr ya ndar tfa rrea chings
cie nce soccultwisd omsandsk illssh ehasinv ite dthegr eat est
tobecom ehe rministe rs andhas rew ardedthei run sel fishserv iceby
sharingwi ththemt he mightyf orce stha tsl eepand awakea ther biddi ngo
neaft er ano therthe poe tsoft ruestgi fth avefo rs akenth ebea tenp
athsofci tie sandme nandf ou ndalon ghe run tro ddenw aysth evi
sionthatn ever fad esherv oice nowth atmen beg intou nde rsta ndi
tagai na stheirfore fa thers un derst ooditisavoi ceofworshi ps of r
omthe ir firstwo  rk forf oodan dshel term enh aves tea dilywon fro
mnat uregifts ofi nsig htandk nowle dg eandpro phe cyuntilno wth
emightie stsec ret sar ewhispere dbythet ree stohimwho li ste nsand th
ewi nds sometim est ake upthe burdenofp roph ec yan dsingo fa fellowsh
ipi nwhi ch a lltruthsha ll beaco mmo nposs essio na s iwalka
longtheold

hi g hway thede epe nin gshadow sto uchthefam iliarla ndsca pew
ithmyste ryoneland mark afteran oth ervanish esunt iltheli ghtsinth
escat ter edfarm ho use sgleamlik ereflected const ella tionsadee
psilencefillst  h egre atheave nsand bro odsov erthewi dee arthal lthi
ngs have becom edi mandst rang eandye tif eel nolonel ine ssi n them
id stofthisst ar lit solit ud ethe heavens shiningo  ver meandth
escatte redh ou seh old firesdecl aretometh atfel lowship of li ghti
nwhichnatu re holds ou therh andtom anand lea dsh imst ep bys tep tothe
uns peak ab lesp le ndo ursofhercen tralsuncha pt erv theopen fie




ldsoneo f

the sigh tsupon

whi ch mye yesres toft enest an dwit hdee pestcont ent isab roadswe
epofmea do w slowl yclim bi ngthew estern skyuntil itp ausesat the
edgeo fa noblep ie ceo fwoo dl a nditi sapla yg roundofw  in da n
dflowersan dw avin ggr assesth ere areind eeddays  wheni tli escold
ands adun de rinh ospi tab les kiesb utforthemost partt heh eav ens
arei nlea gue withclo uda nd suntop rote ctits cha rma ga install com
erswh enthetu rfi sfresh  allt hep romi se ofsum mer isi nitsten de
rgreen al it tle latera nditi s sownth ickwi thd ai si esan dbutt
ercu psandas the breezeplay sup on itt hesefr olics omef lo wersw
hichhavekn ownnohu mante ndin gseem to chase eachoth erin en dless
race sover th ewholee panse ihav ese enthe mrunbre  a thle ssly upth
elo ngslopeandth en sud denl yturn and rush pellmell down aga inif
thewindh adon lysto  pp edf oram ome ntit sendles sgo s sipwit hth
eleaves iamsur eish oul dhaveh e ar dthe g leeful shou tsthe spo
rtivecr iesoft hes evagrant flowe rs whose spellis rewoven overe
veryg en eration ofch ildre nandwhoseu ns tudiedbe aut yandi oyrecallw
itheve rys umm ersome ofth eclew swhich most of ush avelo stino urio
ur ne ythr ough li fee venasiw riteise ethe  whit ea n dyell o whe
ads tossi ngt oandfr oinam oodoffr ee and buo ya n tbei ng whic hha
sformef aceto facew ith the pr oble ms ofli ving anu nspeakab le
pathos wh atadepthoft enderc

olou r fills th earcho fheave nasit ben dsov er thispl ay gr oundo fthe
bloo mingandbea ut yla denforce sof naturethegr eatsum me rcloud  ssh
aping theirc ourses toinvis ibleh arbours ac rossthetr acklessa erials
eal ovetodrop anchor her eand sl owly trailt heir mig htysha dowsv
ainly gropin gforsom ething thatsha llm akethemfa stth ewind stha thav
ecom  ero aring thro ught hewo odlands subduet hei rharshvoi cesand
linge rlong inthei rio urneya cros st hissu nnyepan seitis true theys
ingnolu  ll ab iesa sint heho ll owunderth eh il lwh erethe ythem sel
veso ftenf alla sleepbutth emusi ctow hichth eym ove hasam ag icalc
aden ceof ioy i nitands etsourt ho ugh tt ot hed anci ngm oodofth ef
low erssome time so nqu ietafte

rnoonswhe nt hegre atworldofw orkh ass omeho wseem ed todr opi
tsburde nsinto sp acea ndc arriesn othi ngbut res tandqui etudeal ong
itsi our neyunder thesu mme rskyiha vesee nap ageant int h eope nfie l
dsthath as mad emed oubtwh ethe rad ream ha dnott akenmeu n aware sih
ave seent he firstswe  e tflo wers ofs pring rises oftlyou to fthegr
assw hereth eyh ad bee nhidi ngand call gen tlyt oeacho the rasi fafrai
dt hata singl el ou dwordw ould d issolv ethe char mofsu nandwarm bre
ezefo rw hic hth eyha dwaite dso longa fter the irdrea ml esss  leepo
fmont hsthesebe autif ul childr enofm othereart hseemeda lm ostafr
aidto breakt hestil lnessf ro mwhic hth eyhadcome ands traye dabo utn
oise les slywith subdu edandlovely mien exhalin gap erfume asde
licateas t hemselv es thenwith ar ushandshou  tthe summ e rflo wer
ssudd enl yburst uponthe sceneove rflow ingw ith lifea ndmerriment
inla wles str oopstheyr an hithera ndthit herf lin gingec hoe softhei
rlaughte rovert he whole countrys idea nds oonov ershadowing ent irel
ytheirolderan dmoresen sitiv efell ows thes eindeedso onvanis halto
gether asif lonely andoutofpl ac eu nderth ebr oad gl arean dhigh col
ourso fmids umm eran dnowfor we ekstogeth  ert heg ame wento nwithout
pau seor brea kt herevel rygre wf astan dfu riousun tilo nesu spe
ctedtha tsome nig htthebacc hict hron ghadp ass edthatw ayandl eft
theirm oodo fwi lda ndla wless frol ic behi nda tlastas oftera spects

pr eadi t selfov ertheg lowing skyand eart hth enights gre wvo calwi
tht heinvi sibl echor usof ins ectlifeth erewas am ellows plen douri
nth e moonli ghtwhicht ou che dthedista nthil lsandwi des preadin
gwate rsw ithapatheticp rophec yofc h angeandn owripese re neandr
ich wit hthe accumu lat edbe auty oft hesummerthe autumn fl owe
rsappe are dtheir movemen twaslike  thest atelydan ces ofol den
timesyo uthand it sover floww erego nef ore verbutin theh ouro
fmaturi tyt he rer emai ne danobleb eauty whichtou c hedal limagi
natio nsandco mmu nicatedtoall vis iblethingsas pl end ourofwh ichthe m
ostradian th ourso fea rlys ummerha dbeen on lyfai ntlypr oph etic inth
ecalmof thesegold  en day sthe au tumnf lowers reig ned witham orethan
regalst atea n dwhe nthe first coldb rea thof win terto uche dthemt he
yfellf romthei rgre ates tate sile ntlya ndroy allyas iftheirf ate
weremat ch ed tothe irra nkan dnowthe fi eldsw ereb  are onc emo
refrom such adre amas this

ioft enaw a keioy fu llyt o findt hedra mastilli ni tsfi rst actan
dtofe el sti llbef ore met he ever deepe ningin te res tandeverwiden
ingbeaut yof themiraclepl aytowh ic hna tureann uall yb idsus welcom
eacrosst hisn ob leplayg  roundw ithi tsswe epoflandsc apea ndi tsarc
ho fskyiofte nwa nde rwit hn oco m panio nsbutt hefl ow ersandwith nod
esi reforot her fell ow shiphe rea sinmo resecluded  andq ui et plac
esnature con fides tothos  ewholo vehersom ed eepan dpr ecio ust ruth
snev ert obeputin toword sbute ve ra fte rtor iseat tim esov erthe ho
rizo no fthou ghtl ike vagrant sh ipsthat come andgoag ainst thed ista
nts ea lineorl ike cloudst hat pass al ongt heremo test circ leoft hes
kyasitsl eepsup on the hil ls th eessen ceof pla yisth  eun conscio us
over fl owo flifethatse eksescap ei nper fect selff orgetf ul nessthe
reisnoeffortinitn  owhip of th ewilld ri vi ng theu nw ill inge
nergies toa nactivity fromwhic ht he yshrinko nepl aysas theb irdsin
gsa ndthe br ook runs andth esu nsh inesn otwi thc ons cio uspurpose
butf romthesim pleover flo wint his sensen aturenev  er work sshei
salway satpl ayinp erf ec tuncon sc ious  ne sswitho utfrictionoreff
ortherm ightiest mo vement sar emadeandh ersublime stt asks acc omp
lishedthr ougho utthewholera  ngeofherac tiv ityon eneve rc ome
suponany tra ceofe ffort anys ign ofwea ri nesson eis alwa ys
impressed asr us kinsai dlongagoofw orksof geni usth ath ei sstan di
nginthepre se nc enotofag re ate ffortbut ofa gr e atpow erthat wha
th a sbeen donei sonl yasi ngl eman ifes ta tion o fthepl
ayofaninexhau st ibl efor ce th ereissomewher einth  euniv er
seaninfin it efo untainof li feandbea utywhich ov erfl ows andflo odsal
lworldswi thd ivinee ner gyandl ovel inessw henthe tid erecedesit
paus esb utam omentan dt henthe mus i cofits ret urni ngw avesi sh ear
dalongall shore sa ndits shini nge dgesmo vei rre sistibl yonun tilt
heyhavebathe dt heroo tsof thes olitar yfl owero nt heh ighestal pitist
hi sdi vinemet hod

of gr owth whichn atureo pp osesto ourme chanis msitist hi sin
exhaustibl el if eove rflowinginunc onsc iousnessand bo
undlessfulnesst hat sheforeve rreveal sthe tru thwhich underli  est
heset wogre atfactsne edsno app licat ionto human li feblessedin de
edare they  wholive initan dha veca ugh tfro mi ts ome thin gofthe
ioyt he healthand th epe ren nia lbeaut yof nat urechapte rviear th
andsky




innatur ea

sinar tit ist

he skywhi ch ma kes th el and sca pegiv enthe ide nticalfie  ldswo
ods andretrea tinghi llsan dev erychangeo fskye ver ymodu lation of
lig htwil lproducean ew lands cape inlight a nda tmosphere ar econc
eal edthosemys ter iesofcolo urofd istancean do ftonew hi chclothe
the ch ange lessf eature sof thevisible worldwit hi nfi nitevar ietya
ndch armthisf ruitful mar riage  ofth eupperan dthelowe rf irm ament
sis per hapst heoldestfa ct knownto men itwast heea rlies td isc ov
ery oft hefirsto bserverit st ill isthe mostillu si veand be aut iful
mysteryi nna turethemo stancie nt mythol  ogi esbe ganwith itthelatest
books ofsc ie nce andnat uralo bs ervatio nar estilld ealingwithi tmy
thsth atareol dert ha  nhist oryp ort rayit inlo ftysymb olismor in sp
lendi dhistorie st ha tembodyt heprimiti veid ealsof div inityandh
umanit yt helatest poe tsandpai nte rswoul dfain tou chtheirv erseo
rthe ircan vaswi thsom el umino usglea mfro mthe heartoft hispe rpet
ual mirac le theu nbrokenpr ocessio  nof theseaso nschangesm on thb
ymontht herelat ionso fe artha nds kydayandn ig htall the wat erc our
sesof the wor ldriseininvi si ble moist uret oa fellowshi pwiththe bi
r dsthathave pass edo nswif twin gabo vethei rc urren tsth egrea toutl
yingseas tha tsoun dthenote soft heir vasta ndp assio na teunr estu
pon theshoreso fevery cont ine ntarec on tinua llydrawnu pwa
rdtoswellth einvi sibleu pp eroce anw hichoutof itsmi ghtyl ifefe eds
ev ery greena ndfr uitfu lthin gupon the bosomoft heear thth ism oveme
nt oft heoce  ansu pontheco nt ine ntsthr ough the illimitabl echanne
lso ftheskyisin someways th emo stm ys te riou sand the most
sublimeoft hos emi racl eswhich ea chday testifyt othep rese nce
andmaie st yof thatspir itb ehindna tu reof whomth egreat estofm od
ernp oet sthought wh enhewr oteth usatthe roar in gloom

  ofti me ipl yandwea vefo rg odth e rob
  eth ousee sth imb yth evas tinl andgr ain fi


eld stha tstret chinu nbroke npro cession fr omhorizo ntohorizon have
theseas at theirro otsn otl esst ru lytha nthef ert iles oilou tofw
hic htheysp ring the ve rdure upon themou nta inrange stha tke
epunbrok ensoli tude atth eheartof theconti ne nts speak sf ore
verofthedi stanto ceanswh ic hno urishit andspr eadit likeave st ure
overth eb arre n heights notr ave llerde epinthe  re cessesoft here
mo tes tinlande ve rpa ssesbeyo ndthev oice ofthat encirc lin gocea nw
hich neverdiedo utoft heear softh eanc ien tu lys sesi nt hef irstody
sseyofw an der ingtw omonths ag otheapple

tre eswere whi tew ithth efoam ofth euppe rsea tod ayth er ose shave
bro ughti nto mylit tlep atchofg arde nt hehues withw hi chsuna nds
eapr ocla imedt hei rev erl astingmarr iagei nthetwiligh tofyeste re
ven inthedee pp assion ateh  ea rto fthe sesplendid flowe rs fragr
antsince theyblo omedinsa pphos hand centuri es agothis subl
imewedloc kis annu allycel ebrated ea rthandsk ymeetandco mming lei
nth ismi rac leofcolou ra ndsw eetness an dwheni car rythislov ely
flow e rinto myst udyall thepoe tsfa ll silen the rei sadep thof
lifear adia nt o utcom ef romt h ehearto fmyster iesa hin tofun im
aginedbea u tysu ch astheyhave neverb roug ht tome inal lthei rseekin
gt he yh ave hadth eirvisi  onsa ndma det hemmu sicthey hav ecau ghtf
ainte choe sofr ushing seasa ndfall in gtidest hesh ado wsofmou ntain
sha vefalle nu ponthemwi thlo wwhisp erin gsof unsp eak ablethingsh id
denintheune plored recess es oft heirsolitu destheyh av esear
chedtheli mitl essa rchofhea ven whenitwas sown wi thstar sand gl itt
ered like anarc han gelfullpa nopl ie dagainsta batt ledaybuti
nallthe i rquest the sub li meu nityo fnatu ret hefello wship of
forcew ith forceofsea wi thsky ofmo istur ew ith ligh tof fo
rmwithco lour hasfo un datt heir handsn osu chtra ns cende ntdem on
stra tionasthisfr agilerosewhic ht onig htbring sfro mtheg reattem
pletot hisl itt leshr inethe pe rfum eandth eroyal tyo fobedie nce tot
hehighe st lawsandre ve ren ceforth ediv ine stmysteri esh ere
skyandea rthandsea  meet ina uni onwhi chn osc ienc ec a ndiss olveb
ec ausegod has ioinedth emtoget her cou ldibut pene tratethe  myste r
ywh ichliesat the heartof thisf ragi le flo weris ho uldp ossesst
hesecr e tofthe univers eis houldu nd ers tandthea n cientm
iraclewhic hha sbaffle dwisdom fromt heb eginnin gandwi llno tdi
scoverits elf toth een doftimei fiperm it myt hou gh ttor

es t uponth is fragran tf lowe rtot ouch petaland steman dr ootan
dunit eth emwi tht heva stw orldi nwhi chby aun iver salco nt ribut
io n offorceth eyhavecometo ma turit yifi ndmy self fa cetoface w
itht heolde stan dt hede epes tqu estion sme nha veevers oughttoan swe
rele ment sofear th andsea  andskyar eb lende dhe rei non eof tho
seforms ofra di ant an dvani shing be autywit hwh ichtheuns eenlif eofn
ature cro wnsthe year si nendle ssandi neh austi bl eprofus ion
asitbuddedand openedint  of ul lflowe rin thegar denh owco mplete it
see medini tse lfandhow is olated fr omallo the rvi siblethi ngsb uti
nreal ityhowd epende  nti tw ashowen tir elythecre at ion off
orcesasf ara partasea rt handsk yt heg reatt id efrom the uns  een
casti tfor amom ent intomy poss es sio n foranh ouri th asfilledah uma
nh omew it hit sfarbr o ughts weet ness tom orrowitwil lfallapar
tandretu rn when ceit camea sil ookint oitshe ar tofp  as s iona teco
lou rthew ho levisibleu nivers eth atsee mssofix edandsta bleb ecome
si mmate ria levane scentva nishingiti snolongera permanent or de
ro fseasa n dcontinen tsand ro unde dsk iesitisavi sio npainte dbyan
un se e nhanda gainsta ba ck ground ofmy steryde a dcolduncha ng
eableas  isee itin theglimpseso fa s ing le ho uri tbecomes wa r
mvital fore ve rchangi ngas igaze uponitf romtheou tl o okof thec en
turi esi tisthem om ent arycreati  on of for cesthatst reamthro ug
hitine ndle ssebba ndflowt ha ta retoday tou chi ngth esky wit helus
ivesplen dou ran dtom orrowsp ringingin cha ngefullo velinessf ro
mthedepth sofearthth econ tin entsar et ransf  orm edintothes eas
thatencircl ethe mth esea sris eintothe skie sth atov erar chth emt
heski esmi nglewith thee art hands endbac kfro mth eupli fte dfac
esof flow ers greeting stoth es tarsthe yhavedese rt edm ounta insr
isea ndsinkin  thesublim erhy thm towh ic hth emoveme ntofth eu niver
sei ssetthat so ngw ithoutwo rd sst illa udib leinthe sacre dhour
whenthe mo rni ngstar sann ounc eth edayand thebi rdsmatch the irt iny
mel odies witht heuni vers alharmon yint heu nbrokenvi sionoft

he cen turiesal lthing sa rep lasticand inm otiona div ineener gys ur
gesthr o ughall substa ntialf oramome nth ereasarockf rag i leandv
anis hi n gthe reasafl owe rbutevery where th e samean dal wayssweepi
ngo nwar dth roughi tsillimi tablec hannelt oit sappointede nditist hi
svi taltideon whi  ch th euni verse glea ms andfl oat slikeami rageof
imm utabil ityn e verthe sa meforasingle momen tto thes oul t hatcon
templa te sit anew crea tioneachhour an d toe veryeyet hatr ests upo
ni tnode adm echa nismm oves th  es tars orliftsth etide sor calls th
eflow ers fromt he irsle ept rulythi sist hegar mento fdeit yand he
rei stheawf ul splen dou roft he per petua lpresence it ist heoldstor
yofthegr  ee kp rot eus trans la ted intou niversa lspeechiti sthe
songofthe persia  np oe tth esul le nmo untaina ndth

  ebe ethath umsaflyi ngi oya bou tits flow
    e rybase eac hfrom the sameimm edia
  tefo unta inc omes andbothco mposeone evane
    sce ntra cethere isn odifferenc eint

  hetex tu re finethatsw ov ent hrougho rgan
    icroc kandg rassand thatwhi chth ril lsman
  she arti never ylineas oeri tsweb go dswea ving
    fi nge rsp ass thet imidflo werthat deck

  sth efrag rantfi eldt hedar ing starthat tints
    the solemn dome from onepr opu lsivef orce
  tobe ing reeledboth keepo ne lawan dhavea
    sing leho mec hap ter viit h emyste ryof




nightev ery

day twoworl ds lieat

mydoo ran din viteme int om ys teri esa sfarap ar tasd arknessan dl igh
tthes et worealms hav enoth  ingin com monsav eace rtainid en tityof
form c olourre lationdi st ance arelos torutter lychange din thev
as tfields ofheave  na sti llmo recomp le teands u blime tran sformati
oni swrough titisanewhemis ph erewhic  hh an g sab ovemewithc ountl
essfi resli gh ting theawfulh ighwa ysoftheu niv ersea ndguidin gt hed
aringand rev erentth oug htasit fal tersinth ehighes te mp yreanth em
ind thathas comeinto  fel lows hipw ith natu reis subtlymove dand
penetr at edbyth edecl ine oflightand th eon comingo fd arkne ssa sth
esunisre pl acedbyth  es tar sso is thehotre st les seage rs pi rit
oft hedayrep laced bythei nf ini tec almandpe ac eof thenight thec
han gedoe sn otc omeab  rup tlyorw itht hes udde nnessofv io lent mov
ementnodia li sdelica teenough to regi st erthemom entwhe nd aygivesp
lac etonig htwi tht hatam plitu de ofpow  erwh icha ccompanie se verym
oveme ntwiththats ublim equietud eofe nerg ywhichp ervadese ve ryacti
onnat urecalls theda yacros sthehi llsan dsu mmo nsthen igh tthat has
beenwai tin gatth eeas ter ngat esnosti rn ost rifenon oiseo  fg reat
ac tiviti es putfo rt honav astscalebr eak thesp el l ofan hourw
hichi sth edail yw it ness ofami ra cle andwa itshush ed a ndsilen tin
aworl dwidew ors hipwhi le t healtarfi resblaz eonth ewe stern
hills intha tu nsp eakable splen

do urea rthandairan dseaarefo rthem ome nto nea ndt hro ugh the mallth
ere fla shesadi vine rad iance timeisn o tleftw ithoutth ewit ne sso
fits sanctit yas itfades of fth edialsof ea rt hands lip sli keash in
ingri vul etint othe s horeles sseaofl ight bey ondtheday tha tw asbor
nwiths  eas and suns ati tscr adle isfo llo wedt oi tsg raveby th
elongpro ce ssi onoft he sta rsan dnowthatit ha sgo newit  hit snu
mber le ssa ctiv itie san dtheheatan dstressoft hei rco nten tio
nshowg en tlyan dirresistib lyn atures umm onsherchildr enback toherse
lfa ndtouche sthe br owhotwi tht hefever ofw orkw ith theh and ofpea
ce anin fini tes ilen ce brood  so verthefi eldsand uponth eres tle
ssboso mof thes eai nsensibl yther es tea lsi  ntothought spent andwea
rywi thmanyp roble msa deepa ndsw eetr eposethe s ould oes notsl
eepitr etu rnst othe anc ientm ot heranda th erb reastfe elsthe old
ho pes revive dtheo lda spi ratio nsquick ene dth eoldfaithsr
elightthe ird yin gfires thefeve rofag onisi ngstr  ugg leyie ld
stothecal mofinfin itetru st the clou ds fallapar tandr eve althev
isio nthat see medlos tin violat efor everth ebri effiercef ruitles
sst rifef orself issucceed edbyan unq uest io ningtrust in th
atuniversalgo odabo ve andb eyondallt houg htfor whi chtheu niv
ersesta nds whosh all despairw hileth  efi eldso feartha resow nwi
thflow er sandt hef ield sofh eavenbl oss omw ithsta rs theope nheartk
nows inare  vel atio nwhic hcome st o itwithever ydawn andsu ns et
that lifed oesn otm ockits chil dren when ith olds thi scupofpe acet
ot heira ngui she dl ipsan dt hatin tothistid eles sse aofr esta ndbe
autyever ybr ea thle ssa ndturb ulent streamletf low satlastin
thesilenc eofni gh thow

re ala nddivin et heuni ver sebe com esdoub tan dunbelie fretrea
tbefo ret heawfulv oicesth atwere sil enced bythed inof thed aybutnow
th att hel it tle wor ldo fma nish ush edseem tohav eb len de dallso
unds in toth emselve sbe yondth ecir cleoftrees  throug hwh ichabr ok
envis ionofst arsco m esandg oeswit ht heeve ningw ind theb road ear
thliesh ushe dan dhidd enalo ngth efamil iar roadan  ewand mys
teriousc harm i ssp rea dlikeanett haten ta nglest hefe e tof ever
ytravelle ran dkee ps himlo iteringon whe rehew oul dhavepass ed inuno
bs ervan thas tebyda yt hegreatelms murmu ri nlo  win artic ulat
etones an dth eshadowsatth eirfe eth ide themsel ve sfrom them oonm
ovingnoise less lyt hrou ghallt hesummernig htthewo ods int hedist
ances  tan dmoti on les sinthewe altho ftheirmass ed fol iageke ep
inggu ardove rtheunb rokensi lence that rei gnsinall theirbr anch
ingais le sbe yondt hefarspre adingw  atersl iew hiteanddream likean
dte mptth eth oughttoth efa iryla nds thatsle ep ius tbeyondthe line
ofthe hori zonasw eet andr es tfu lmyster  y likea bri dalveil
hidesth efac e ofnatu rean dheon lyc anve nt uretol ift it whoh asw
onthepr iv ileg eb ylo nga ndf ait hfuldevot io nift hen ightbest
arlitthe

sh ado wsare de nserthe out looknar row erthem yst erydeep erbutwha
tav isionov erhang sth ewor l dandma kesthenig hts ublim ewi ththe poe
tryof godstho ught vis ibleto al leye swhodoe snotfee lt hep assa
geo fdiv ine drea mso verhist ro ubledl ifewhe nthe inf initemea dows
ofhe ave naresudd enlyabl oo mwithl igh tonsucha nighti mmor talit  yi
swri t tenon earthandsky in thesile nc eandd ark nes st her eisnohi
nto fdeathas weeta nd fr agra nt lifes e emsto bre atheitss ubtl einau
di blemusi cth rougha llthingsi nthed epthsof the woodso  ne fee
lsnolo ne lin essno liq uidno te ofhermitth ru shisne eded to maketh
atsile nc emusic th ehar mony ofunive rsalm  ove mentrou nd edbyoneth
oughtcar riedfor wa rdb yonepow erguide dtoonee nd ist heref orthos
ew how ill li stent hem ighty act ivit ieswhi chf eedthe centurygir
dedoa kfro mth einvisiblecha mbe rsof air andthesec retplace so fth
eea rth aresod ivinel ya diu stedt oth ei rworktha toneshal ln everd
etec tthe irt oilby anyso undofs trugg leor by any sight of effortno is
el ess lyinv is iblyth  egreatworld breathesn ewl ifein toeve
rypartof its bein gwhi lethe dark ne ssc urtai nsitf rom thefierc
eardouro ft heda yin thenig htthef ou nta ins

ar eop enand flo wingamarv ell ousf res hnessto u chesleafan dfloweran
dgrassa ndre bui ldsthe irs hatte red loveline ssthe starslook
downfromth  eir inacc essi bleh eigh tsona newcreationa ndasthe pr o
ces sionofth eho ur spa ssesnoisel es sly onitl eavesb ehindadewyf ra
gr ancewh ichsha l lexh alebefore theri sings unlike aunive rsa lincen
sem akin g theportal softhem orning swe etwithp ro phe ciesoft heflo
wers whichareye tt obl oomandt hebir dsw hos es ongst ill sle epswi
ththe hour sitsh allset tomu sic theun br okenr epo se ofnat  ure
bornnoto fidlen es sbutof thep erf ec tadiustm ent of imm easurab
leforcesto th eirtaskbecom esmore re aland comp rehensi blew hent hed
arknesshidesth einf ini tudeofde tails and leavesonly th egreatm ass
iveeff ects for theey etorest uponwhi lem ens lee pt hewo rlds  weeps
sil ently onw ardun derthe watchful starsi nafli ght whichmak esnos
ou n dandle avesn otrac et hroug hth edeeps ha dowst  hemount ain sloo
minsoli tar yandawful gran de urthewid ese assen dforthan dre call
thei rmig htyti des thecon tinen tsliev eiled inr ollingmist sth
eimmea su rableun ivers egl ittersandbur nstothef arthesto uts kirts
of spa ceandyet nestledam id thiss ubl ime activit ythe litt leflowe
rdreamso fth edayan dinits sleepi sm ini ste red to asp erfec tl
yasifitwer et he onlycreat ed th in gwhe non esta ndsonth eshor

esof nig htandl oo kso ffonth at might yse aofda rkn es sinw hichaw orl
dl iesengul fe dther e isnot houg htbutwor shipa nd no speechb uts
ilencef ace to facewi thi mmensit  yand in fini tyon etravelsi nth
oughtamo ngt heshini ng islands thatr ise upoutof thefath omle sssh ad
ows an dfe elseverywh erethes tir ofali fewhichkno wsn owea ri n essa
ndmak esnos ou ndwhichpe rva desth ed arkne ssnol essthant hel
ightandm ak esth enig htg lorio usa sthed ayw ithit sgarnitu re ofc
ons tell ati onsandeve na sonewaitsspeec hle ssan da wes truck
themorning sta rtouchest hee dgesoft hehi llsanda new daybr ea ksr
esple nde n tin the easter nskychapter vi iio ffshore who




hasnoth eard

ami dtheh

eat and din ofcit iest hev oice oft hes ea striki ngs udden ly int
oth ehushoft houghtit spen etr atin gn oteofmy ste ryandlongin gthe nw
orkandt hef everwhi  chgo eswi thi tva nishe donth eins tant an
dinthecr ow ded streeto rin th ena rrowroo mthere ro se the vision
ofun broke nstr etc hesofs ky freewind sandthesu rg eof theu nrest
ing wav estha ti nvi tationnev erlos  esit salluringp owern odist anc
ewastesi tsmus ic andnopre occupa tio nsile nce si tssolicitatio
nitstirs the oldestmemori  es andaw ake nsthem ostprimi tiv einstin
cts thel ongpastsp eaksthrou ghi tand thro ughitt heburie dg ene
rations sn atc hamome ntaryimmort alityh i storythat hasleftnore
cordric hand var iedh um anexpe rien ces thatha venoc hronicleris eout
ofth ef orgetfuln essi nwh ic hth eyareengulfed an darep uiss ant
oncemore int hei ntensean dirr esis ti ble longing wit hwhichthehea
rtanswe rsth ecall oft hesea oncemor eth eblo od flo wsw  ithf ulle
rpu lseth eeyef lash eswith consc iou sfr eedoman dpow erthehear
tbeatst oth emusi cof winda ndwav ea sin theda ys when the fath er so
fal ongp asts pre adsaila nd s ough thom espoil orch ang eupont hetr
ackle ss wastei ntoe ver ypastthes eahas  some times ound edi tsm igh
tynoteof ioyoran gui shandd eepi ne ver ym emoryth ere rema in ssome
vision oftos singwav esth atonce br okeoney eslon gsea leda llday th
efre ewin dshave

fil led the heav ensan dflu nghere and thereah and fulof foam upo
nthes u rfaceof th edee pnoc lou dhasdim me dth espl  en douro fad
aywhic hha sfilledth er o und heave nsw ithsof tmu sican dtouche dthe
seaw ithst ran geandch ang efu lbea utyitha sbe enenought owaita  nd
wat chto forget se lfto esc apeth el imitat ions of person ali
tyandtobeco me partofthemo vem en twhich hour by hou rhaspass edthr
ough on emar vel lousch angeaft era notherunti lnowit seems topause
under the sl eeple ss vigil anceo fth estarsthe ylookdown fr omt heiri
mmea sura blea ltit udeso nthevastepan seofwhich on lya mini aturehe mi
spher estr e tchesbefo remehowwid eandfatho mlesss ee  mst heoc ean
evenfromas ingle iso lated poin twha t infini tedistan cesar  eonl
yhalfvei ledbythed ist anth oriz online wh ati slandsa ndconti nent
sand undisco ver edworldsli ebe yondthatfain tandev err ecedin gcir
clewh ere thes ightpaus eswhil ethet hou ghttr avelsu nimpe ded
onitspa thlessw aythereli es the untamedw orl  dwhic hbro oks nohuman
contr oland preser ve sthep rimeval sol itudeofth eep ochsbefo
remencam et her eareth eeleme nta lfor cesmi ngl ing andcommin glingi
neternal fel lowshipsand ri valries therethewin dss weepandth  estor
msm arsha lthei rsh ado wsason thefirs tdayt heretoo th es unl ights
lee psont hes umm erseaasi tslept in tho seforg ott en su mmers be
forea sailhadev erwhite nedthe b lueo rak eelc utevanes cen tfur ro w
sint het racklesswa steever yh our hasbrough titsc

hange toma ket hisdaym emo rableh ou rbyh ourt hel ightshave tran sf
orme dth ewater sand hungoverthe mas kyfull ofv arie dand chan g efu
lrad ia nceacr oss thelineof thedista  nthori zon whit es ail shaveco
meandgo neinb roken andm yste rio uspr oc ession and theimagina
tionhasfol low edt hemfarinthe iru nknownio urne yin gs assil entlyas
theypassedf  ro msightal lh uman histor yena ctedi nth isvas tprovin
ceofnat ur esem pire hasvanis he dandlef tnotra ceo fitselfs ave here
an dther ea bitofd rift wood the relie s the un conquered  andfo reve
rin violateking dom offorce soverwhic hnohuma ns killwi llev ercas tt
henet ofcon ques tthe seas pea kst ot heimagin

ati ona snooth er asp ectofthenat ur al world doesbe ca use ofitsva
stnes sits immeasu ra ble andoverw hel mingpowerits exc lusionfromhu
manhi sto ryitsfree buoy antch angeful bei ngit standsf orthosest
range  an dunfam ili arrev elation swi thwhichnat uresometime sbre
aksin uponou reasyrela tionwi th hera ndb ring sbackont hein sta ntt
hatsen seof re mot enesswh icho nefee ls whenininti matef ell owshi
pafr ie ndsudden lyliftsthe c urtain fromsome great exp erience hith
erto unsus pectedinth evastswe epoflifethr  ou ghn atur ether em usta
lwaysbe aspect sofaw fuls trange ne ssgreat re almso fmysterywil lrema
inunex pl oredand almo stinac cessibleto hum anthou ghtdayswilld aw
natin tervals inwh icht hose wh olovemost an daren eares tna ture will
fee lan impenet rablec loud over al lthingsandbe sudde nlys mit tenwit
has en seofweak nessthe grea t estof al lherinte rpr etersare bu tch
ild reninknowled geo fhe rmightya ct ivitiesan df orc esonth eseathisse
nse ofremo  te nes san dstr angen es scomesofte ner thaninthepr esenc
eofanyo ther na tur alformev en the mount ainsmak eshe lter edp
lacesforo urth oughtatth eirfee tor alo ngtheir pr ecipi tous le dgesb
utthe seamakesnoc oncess ion sto our human we aknessandle av est hemes
sagewhic hit intone swi ththevo iceof te mpestan dthe roa rofsu rg
ewithou tan int erpr et ermen havecom et oitinallage  sfu llof apas si
on at ede sire toca tc h itsmeaning andent er intoi tss ecretbu tth
ethou ghto fth ebolde sto fth emhason ly ski rtedits sh ores and thev
astswee pof untame dwa ter srem ainsa so nthefir stdayh omerhas gi ve
nus theso ngo  fthel and locke ds eab utwh er eha stheoceanf oun dah
umanv oic eth atisn otlos t andfo rgott enwh en its peak sto usinitsow
npen et rating to ne st hem oun tainsstandr eveal  edi nmorethan onein
terpreta ti onto uche dby theirownsublim itybutt he seare mai
nssilenti nhu man spe echbeca usenov oi cewil leverb estrong en ought
omat chit sa wfulmo nodyit is becau set hesea preser

ve si tssecre tth ati tswaysour ima ginati onso ro yally and
holdsusbyan in fluence whi chnev er lo os ensitsgra spaga inand
againwe ret urnto  itspe nta ndwor na nditre fi ll sthec upo fvit
ali ty thereis lif een ou ghandtos parei ni tsin visibl ean di nexha
us tib lechamber sto reclothetheco ntinents wi thverdur ean drecreatet
hesh attered str engthofm anf acingitsu nbrokens ol itu  desthe lim
itations ofhabitan dth oughtbecome le ssobv iou sweesca pethem onot
onyofar ou tinewh ich blursthe se n sesandm akest hespi rit lessse
nsi tivet oth eunive rsea boutitlif eb eco mesfreea ndpla st  icon
cemorea deep con sciousn esso fits i neha ustiblenessco me sov
erusandrecreatesh opevi gour an dim agination unde rtheli ttl
ebridgesofh  abita ndt heoryw hichweh av emade for oursel vesho wv
asta ndfa tho mlessthes eao fbei ngi swhatundis cov ere df orces ar
ethe rewhatunknow nsecre tso fpowe rwha tunsear chablep os sibil itie
sofdevelopme ntandchangeho wf reshandnewb eco mestha  twh ichwe tho
ugh toutwor nwit husea nd touched withdec ayho wbo und lessand untr
avell  edt hatwhichw eth oughtexplor edan dsoun de dtoitsr emotestb
oun datnigh tw hen thevisio nofth

ew aters grow sin distin ct wha tvoice sitha sforoursol itud etheet
er nal not eof sadnesst  owh ichalla gesa nd racesha ve liste ned
andt hef ainte choe sofwhich are hea rdine veryli te ratur efi llsus
wi thalo ngingasvas tasth es eaan d asvague in fini ty and ete rni ty
areno  ttoogrea tfo rthespir itw hen the spell oft hes eaison itan dth
evoic eo fth ese af il ls itw ith uncre at edm usi cchap te rixa
mountainr ivule




tthismo rn

i ngtheday brokewi

thap romiseo fsu ltr yheat whic h hasbeen fa ithful lyke ptthe air wasl
ifelessthe bird  ssi len tth elandsca pes eemed toshri nkf romtheard
ourofa ga zethat pene tra tedtot he v eryr oots ofthetrees an dco vere
ditse lf wit hafai nth azeallt hingss tood h ushed andm  oti onless
inadr eamofh eat eventhehar ve s tfiel ds were dese rte donsuch adayna
ture herselfb  ec omes v oic elesss heseems toretre atintotho sed
eepan ds ilentch ambe rswhe reth eso urceso fherlife arehi dde nalikef
ro mth ehea tan dcoldf romda rkne ssa ndli ght astr ange andforeb odi
ngsti  l lnessis abr oadintheea rthandone hi deshim se lff romth esu
nas froma nenemyi nthi sun nat ur alhu sh there

wa sone voicewhic hmad ethes ile nce lesso minou sand rev ivedthe spen
tandwit her edfresh nes softh esp irittohe arthatvoi ce see medtom
et hism orni ngthe onecon so la tion whichth eda yof fereditcall edmew
ith coo ldelici  ou stones th atse emed almostaud iblea ndib ravedt
hedead lyheata sth e travel ler urgesh iswa yo ver thedesert tothe oas
ist hatp rom isesad ra ugh tofli feas ipasseda l ongtheb ro adai  sl e
ofthev illag est reeta rched by the venerab letree sofano ld erg
eneration iseem ed to beind reamlandno s oundbr ok et he reposeofm id
dayno foots tep echoed fa rornea rt hecattle stoodm oti on less int
hefiel dsben eaththeshe lt eri ngbran chesitu rne dintothedu stycount
r yroada ndsa wth evisi onofthe grea ten cir cli nghill sr emo tesha
dowlessand dream likeag ainstthewh ite augustsky isaunte red slowl
yonpau sin  g hereandth ereatt he footofs omes tur dyoak or wid ebra
nc heda ppleun til ir eachedthelit tlest reamt h atcomes rip plingd
ownfro mthe mount ainglena shor twal kac rossthef ield  s under theb
urning sun brough tmein tot heshado wof thetree st hats kir tthebo rd
ers ofthe wood landt heb rookloi te red betweeni  tsg reena ndslopin
gbanksa ndb rokei nti nybillo wsove rth esmoo th ston esthatl ayin its
bedthe shadow sgre wde ns era sia dva ncedand adel icious co o
lnessfro mth e depthsoft hewoodst ouch edt hesult ry atm osphe reamome
ntl ateran distoodwit  h intheg lenth ewo r ldofh umanac tiv ityh
adv anish ed shuto utofsigh tan dsoundby thed eep en ingfo lia geoft
he tre esbehindm eoverhe ad har dlyal eafsti rr  edbutthe branch i
ngbo ughsspr ead ama rvellousr oofbet weenth e heavensand thew oodland
pat hsandsu ffe red onlyastr ayfla sho flighthe rean d there tostr ik
ethro ugha sia dvanc ed slowly alongth  ew e llwornpa thbesi dethe bro
okthegle ngre wmorea ndm orena rro wthe hill side smo rean dmorep
rec ipitousin thed usk ylig htthatsifte  dd own throu ghthe grea
ttrees ifel tthedel ici ousre liefo f lowt one safterthe glareo ft hes
ummer dayit was anoth er wor ldinto whi  ch iha dcomeaw orldo funb
roken r epo sean d silen ce aworldof sweeta ndf ragrant a irsco ol
edbyt hem ountainr ivul etands hi eld edbythem ountain sum mitsandt he
arc hingumbr agethep ath van ishedat lastand

not hing remained bu tthe nar rowchan nelofthe bro oki tselft hesmoot
hs ton esmak ingapr eca riousa ndunce rtainf o otingforth ead
venturous eplorer how soo thingwasthe ceaseles  spl ashoftha tli ttl
estreamfr ettin gi tsmo ssgrow nbanks anddashi ngi nminiatur esurg
eag ainstth es tonesinit spath whatinf ini tepeac er eig nedi  nthi
splacear oundw hichthe br othe rhood ofmoun tains had gatheredtoh ol
ditinviol ate againsta ll come rs thegreatr ockswer emo sscove  red
thest eepsl opes oneithersid ewe refai ntlyfl ec kedwit hlig htan
donesaw hereand ther ethro ugh the clu ster edt runks oftrees agl
eamofblue skysom et imest h ebroo kn arro wed  toatinyst rea mrush
ingwithi mp e tuou scurre ntbetwe enth erockywal lsthatf ormedit sch
annel theni tspr eadout sha llowand nois yo versom ebr oaderep ans
eofwh ites anda ndpolis hedpebb le theni tloi ter edinthes hadowo fagr
ea trockand be cam eadeep si l entpo olfu llo fshado w sand themys
teri eswh ic hlurkin suc hre moteanddu skypl aces it wasb esides uch
apool thatip

au sed atlast ands e ated myse l fwithi nf init eco ntentb eforem ethe
glennarr owedint  oarock yc has move rwhichth eadv e nturo ustre esth
atclu ngt otheprecipi toush ills idess pr ead adenseroofo ffoliaget
hedark p oolat myfe et wasfull  ofm yste riou ss ha dows and seem ed
tocoverepo chsofbu rie dhisto ry asist udiedi ts motion lesssur  fa c
etheold med iaevallege ndsofbl ack fat homlesspo olscame ba cktom
eandifeltt heair ofen chan tm en tst e alin gov erm el ullingmylat
terdaysc epti ci smintos le epandmaki ngallmyste ries ratio nal
andall mar velsproba bleinthe ses ile ntdepth snomagic  al artha
devers ubmerg ed citieso rca stl eson thestille stofal lq uietaft er
noo nsnomuff le dec hoesf aintandfar fl oatupth rought hewav ele ssw
aters bu twhokno wsw hatshado wshave  sun kin tothe sesu nlessde pths
what refl ectio nsofwav ingbra nche swhatsittin gs ofsubd uedlight
what hushedec ho esofthe forgo tten summer sthatp er ish edhereage
sagoins ucha placeats ucha nhou ron

ef eels t hemos ts ubtl ea ndth emo stsea rch ings pellwh ich nat
uree verthrows overt hoset hatsee kher aspell wove nofma nych arms mag
i calpo tions an dpow erfuli ncantat ionsthe qui etofthep
laceawfulwit  hth eunbr ok ens ilenc eofce ntur ies thesofth alfligh
tw hichconce als more than itdis close stheretr eati ngtr un
ksoftrees int erlacingth eirbra nc hesag ainstinvasi onfro mlightor
heators oundthes teep ravin er eced in ginda rke randd arkerd
istanceu nt ilitse ems likeon eofthefa bledp as sages toth eun de rwo
rldthe wideshad ow ypo olint owhic hno sunl ightfal lsan dinw hichn
ig htitself seems tos le epund erthe veryey esofd ay allth eseth ing
sspe akal an guagew hiche venthe dulle s tmustund ersta ndas isi
tmusing cons ciousofthe  da r kes tshado wsanddeep es tmy steries
closeat han dandyet undisturb edbyt he mire cal lth atoneofthen ob
lest p oemson deat hev er wri ttenwas inspi re dinth ispl aceandi not
ewithout su rpri seasi tss o lemn linesco mebackto me tha tthere
isnoh orro rini tn oi gnob lefea rb ut aweand re ve re nceandt hesu
bli mit yof agreatand hop efu lthoughtt he o rganm usi cofthos eslowmo
vin gvers essee ms liket heveryvoic eofapl aceou tofw hic hall dread
ha s gonef rom th ethou ght ofdea tha ndwh eret heb riefspa no flife
see mstoa rch theab ysso fd eath withi mm orta lit ychap te rxthe earl
iestinsight




sthehea v

enw hichlies aboutusi

nou rinfan cylik eeve ryoth er he ave nofwhic hmen haved reame dliesm
ai nlywi thi nusi tistheh eave noffre shinst in ct so fun wornre ce
ptivi tyofexpan di nginte lligenceiti sa heavenoff aithandwonde  ra
se v eryhea ve nmust bei tisahe av enofr ecurri ngmi ra cl eo f
renewi ng freshness ofdeepe ni ngintere stintosuc ha heaveneve
rychildi  sbor nwho b ringsi ntoli fetha tl eave nof theima gina tion
whic hlater on ist openetratet heuni verse an dm ak eitoneint hes
ublimeor der oftr ut han do fbe autyasi write th emerr ysh ou tsofch

il d renco met hroug htheop en windowan dsee mpartof tha tuni versal
sou ndin whic ht hest irofleave sthef ai ntfar son gofb ir dsandt hen
oteof ins ectl if eareb len ded when ic ameacr osst hef ieldafe
wmom e ntsa goavoi cec alled m efr omunder the a pplet reesan da litt
lefig ure witha flush ofi o yonher facean dthe f adele ss lig ht ofl
ovei nhe rey escameru nning wi thun ev enp acet omee tmehows ligh
tandfr ailw as that vi  sio nofchi ldh oodto the thou ghtwhi ch
sawtheawf ul for cesofna turea two rko rrath eratpl ay abouth er andy
et howser en ewas herlo oku  pon the gre atworl ddr opp ingi tsfr uit
ather feeth owfamili ara ndate as ehe ratt itu deinthep res en ceof
the sesublim em yst eriesshe is atone withthe hourandth  esc en es heh
asno tbe gunt oth ink ofher sel fas apa rtfro mt hethi ng swhichs ur
round hert hat strang eands uddensen seo funr ealityw hic hmakes meatt
im esanalien andas trang er in thepr es enceo fna t uremovin ga bou
tinworld no treali sediss tillf ar offfo rhe rthesuns hi nesan dth
ewi  nds blo wth efl owersb loo man dthes tars gli stenthe trees hol
dou tthei rprotec tin garms andt heg rassw avesitssof tgar men tan
dshea ccept sth emwi thoutat hou ght ofwhati sbeh indthem o rshallf ol
lowt he mthepa infu lp roces softho ught whi chisfir sttosep ar
ateherf romna tu reand th entoreun ite hert oitina hig hera nd morespi
rit ua lf el l owship has hard lybegunsh estillwalk sin thesof tligh
tof faith anddr in ksi nthe immor ta lbeau tya sthefl ow era therside
drinks in the dewand th eli ghti tisshe af ter all who isr ighta  ss
he pla ysioy ous lya nd athom eo nth egrou ndwhicht hee ar thqu ak
ema yrocka ndund ert heskywhich sto rmsw ill darke nan dre ndthe
farbro ught instin cto fchi  ldh oodaccepts withouta qu estiontha
tgreatt ruthofu n ityandfe llow shipt owhic hk nowle dge comesonlya ft
erlon gandagoni singq uest betwe enth ein nocentsle epofc  hildhoo din
thearmso fnatu re andthecal mr epo seof th eoldma nin the same enfold
in gst ren gth th ere stre tchesthel ongsleep lessd ayofquest ion sear
chandsuff eri ng attheend thewis est returnsto th ego alf rom whichh
esetout to the litt lech ildna tu rei sas

uc ces sionof newan dwonde rf u limpressio ns com ing heknowsno
twhenceheop  enshis ey esupo naw orldwh ic hisas new tohi masi s
thevi rginc on ti nen tt oth ef ir std iscove reritmatt er sno tthat
countlesse  ye shaveal rea dyop enedandcl osed onth esamema gicala ppe
arance st hat numb erlessf eethavetrod dent hesamepath sfor himt
hemorni ngs tars tills hin eso nth efirstd ayan dthed ewofth ep rim
evaln igh tis sti llo nt hef lowersda ybyda yl ighta nd sha dowfall
inu nb rok ensuc ces sionon thes en sitivesu rfaceofhis mi nda
ndgradual lyanele me nta ryor der discovers it selfinther egula
rityofthe serecu rr ing impression sf ormco lourdista ncesizerela
tivi tyofpo sitionar efel trathertha ns eenandth edi mand confus
edma ssof sen sat ion sdi scoverss omet hi ngtrustwor thyandsta
blebehind natureisnow sim pleapp earanc  ethoug ht has notbeg
untoinquir ewheret hel ant ernis hi ddenwhi chthr ows thiswon de
rfulpi cture onthec loud snorwhoit isthats hi fts thesce nes day an dn
ight altern ate lyspre  ado uta chang efulsuccess ionofw ond e
rssimplyt hattheyoun ge yesmayl ookupo nthe man dgras sisg ree nand
skyb luet hat young fe etmay fin dso ftre stin gplac esan dth eyou
nghe adabeautifulr oof ove ritev eryd a yisanewdi scov erya nd  every
nig ht r ece ivesintoi tsd reams somen ewobiect from the worldo fsig
hts andsou ndsn atu resur ro undshe rch ildwit

hinvis ibleteach ers andma kese venitspla yatraini ngf orthe high est
duti e sgradual lyi mpe rceptib lyshee  pandsthev isionandsuffe rsh
ereandt her eahint ofs omethin gdee per andmo r ewon de rfultosti
randdi rec tthe youngdisc ov erer hes eesthe app letre eletfallit  sb
loss oms andlo thef rui tgro wsd aybydayt oam el low anden ticin gri
pe nes su n derhis eye ssuddenl yhedetec tsahi dde nseq  uencebet we
enflowe r andfru ittheros ebushis covere dwi thbud  ssm allg reen un
sightly anig htpa ssesa ndbeh oldgreatc l uster sofblo sso
mingfl owers thatcall hi mbytheirfr agrance andw henh eha sc omere
wardhimwi tha mira cl eof colo urhere isa noth e rmyster ya nddayb
yday th eymulti plyandg row yet mo rew onde rfulthes eva ried and marv
ellousapp  earan cesare nol ongerdetac hedandchang ele ss tohimt
heyareal ive andtheycha ng emo ment bym oment aht heyo ungfee thavec
om enowto  th eve rythr esho ldof thet emp le and fort unatearet he
yif thereb eon etoguidet hem whos eh earts ti lls pe aksth elan guage
ofchi ldhoo dwhile her thoughtr es tsinthegr eattr uth swhichc omewi th
dee pande arnest livin gchi ldho odis def raudedo fhalfi  tsinherit an
cewhennoo ne swin gsw idebeforeit thed oo rin tothef airy landof na tur
eala ndin whi chthemost be autifu l drea ms areli kev isio nsofthedi
stanta lps clou dlikeap pa ren tlyevan esce ntyeteter nallytruei
nwhichthec omm onestreal itie sa remor ewo nderfulth anvisions how
many childrenl ivea lltheir  chi ldho odinthev eryh ear tofth
isrealman da ren ever somuc ha stol dtolo oka bou tthem th esub li
memi ra clep layis year  lyp erforme dinthei rsig ht andthe yonlyhear
it saidt hatit ish otor cold that th eday isfa ir or dar ka ndno wthe
rec ome su dden in sigh

tsi nto still larg erandm oreawful trut hsase nseofw ond eran dawem
akesth e night so lemnwi thm yst erywh odo esnot recall some starlit
nig htwh ich sudden lyal oneonac ountr yroad perhapss eemed to f
lashits sple ndourin tohisv er ysoul and liftallli fefo ram omen ttoa
sub lime hei ghtt het r eessto od s ilentdo wnthel  ong roadn oothe
rfoots tepe cho edfa rorn ea ronew asalonew ithnat ure an dato new
ith hersu spec tingno str an gen earn ess ofherprese nc enosudd
enrevela ti ono fherinne rs elfand yetintheve ry moo dinwh icht hes
ewe re bot hpos sibl ea ndnat uralt hebo yofw ordswort hsi maginat
ion wou ld standbeneat hthetreeswh enthe earli eststar sbe ganto move
alo ngtheedg esoft hehil ls andw ithfi nge rsint er wov enblo wmi
mich ootings totheowlsa ndth eywou ldshouta cr oss thew

        ate ryva leand shout
  againr esp onsive tohi sca llwit hquiv
  eringpeals an dlo nghalloo sandscrea msand
  ech oesl oudredo ubl edandre dou bledco ncou
  rsewildof mir thandiocu nddinandw heni
  tc hance dth atpaus eso  fde epsi le ncemock
  dhis skillt he nsom etimesi nthat sil encew
  hile hehunglis te ning agentle shock of mild
  surpriseh a scarri edfar in tohi sheartth
  evo iceofmo unt aint orr entso rth evisi
  bl escenewo uldenter un awa resinto hismi
  ndwit halli tssolemn imag ery itsr
  ocks its woo dsandt hatunce rta inhea
  ven recei ved into thebosomo fthest eadylake
  itis ins uchmo od sas thiswh enal


lt hi ng sare forgo tt enan dhea rta ndmind are opentoeve rys ighta
nds ound tha tnat ur ecome stoth eso ulwit hsom edeeps weetm es sag
eofh erin nerb eing andwi thinvis ib leh andli ftsth ecu rtai
nofmyster yfor onehu she dandfle et ingmome nta siw riteth eme moryofas
ummera

ft e rnoon lon gagoco me s backto metheoldo rcha rds leeps inth ed re
amy air thebird saresi le nta tranqu ils pir itbro ods overth e
wholeear thunde rthewi desp rea dingb ranch  esabo yis intentlyreadi
nghehasf a lle nu ponabito ftransc  en den talwri ting i nam ag
azineandforthe firstti me h aslearne dth att oso memen theg rea
tsilent worl da bout him tha tseem ssorea landc hange les sisi mmate
ri alan dun substantia la visionproi ect edbythesoulupo nillim
itablespa ce ont hein stan tallthingsa resmi  tt enw ithunre ali
tythes oli dearths inks beneathhi man dleav eshim solit aryanda wes
tru ckinau niv ersethat isa dreamheca nn o tunderst andb ut h efeel
sw hateme rsonmeantw hen he saidt hesu premebe ingdo esno tb uild
upn aturear oundu sbut put sitfo rt hthrou ghusas th eli feof th
etree putsfor th ne wbr anch es and leav esth atwhi chw asfixeds tab
lecast  inpe rmane ntf ormsf orever wass ud denlyanni hilat
edbyare vel ationwhi chspoketoth eh e artrathert hanth einte ll ect
andla idbare atag lan cetheunse ens piri tual fo u ndatio nsu ponwhi
challthin gsrestatlas tfro mthat mom entthe boys aw with  othe reye
sandli ved hen cef orth inthi ngsn otm adewi thhandsifw ec ouldbu tre
vive thec onsci

ou sn essof chi ldhood ifw ecouldbutlook ou toncemore th ro ughit sun
clou ded eyes what divinit ywo uldsowthe univ erse withligh tandm ake
itr adiantwi thfa deles svi sion so fbeauty ando ftruthch apterit he
hearto fth ew oodst




hereare ce

rta inmoo ds inw hichm

yfeet tur nasbyin stinc tt othew oo dsis etou tu po nthewind in gro
adwit  h aze sto fant ici pationw hose edge n orep et itionoftheaf
terep erie nc eeverdulls il oit erattheshadedtu rnwa tched o ftenby
th ebr ightqu icke yeofthe squir re lpe eringo verth eol ds ton
ewalland sometim esut ter ing achat teri ngp rotestaga instmyin v
asionofhis heredit arypriv ac yhereand th ere alongthewa yofmyfa  mili
arp ilgri magea gre att re es tandsatt heroadside a ndspr eads itsfar
re ach ingshado wov erthetr ave llerandthes eareth epla ces whereialw
ays throw mys elf ontheg round a ndwait forth espiri to fth ehoura ndt
hesc ene tot akepos se ssi onof meo nen eedsp re para tionforthe sa nc
tit iesan dsolemnitie sof the woodsandin the slowprogres sw hic hialw
ays ma keh ithe rwardthe world s lipsaw aywi ththevilla get hatsi nksbe
hind theh ill atthefi rstt urnan dremin dsm enol on ger bysig htor sou
ndthatl if ei sfrett in gitsc ha nnels ther eand ev erywhere wit
hitsworl doldp ath osandonwar dmov eme ntcaught onthes udd enbyun
seencurr entsan ds wep tintow il deddie sorflung ove rapre cipi cein
amisto ft earsa sigo o nifeelare tu r nofe mo tions  wh i ch ia m
sure h avethe ir rootinmy earli e st ance stry afres heni ng of
sensewhi chtellsm e thatiamnea ri ngaga intho sesce ne swhi c ht
heunwor nperc eptio nsofpr imiti vem enfirs tfrontedthe co nsciousse
lfd irect edintel  lec tualmovem entwithinmes eemssomehowt oceasean
dsomet hi ngdee perolde rf uller ofm ysterytak esitsp lacet heinst
in ctsasse rtthe mse lvesa ndi amdimlyco nsciou sofanelder wor l dt
hroug hwhichion ce wa lkeda ndyet notibut someo n ewho sememoryl ies
bac k ofm ymem ory asthe farthe stfa inte st hi llsfad ei nto
infinity onthebou ndari esof thew orldiamr ea dyf orthewoods no wfo
riame  s ca pingt hel imi tatio nso fmy o wn personal ity withitsnarr
ow ex per ienceandits shor tme moryan diamenteri ngi nto consc iousne
sso f ar acelifea nddi mlysurveyingt he r ecor dsof ara cemem oryatlast
the roadtur ns a brup tlyfro

mt hehi lls idet owhic hitcling swit hth eloyalty of ancie nt associ
atio nan drunnin gs traight acrossalowl yin gmeadow entersad eepwoo d
andvanis hesfro msight f orma nyam ile itiswith adee psigh ofc onte
n ttha  ti fi ndmy s elfo ncem or einthat dimw o nder landwh osem yste
ri esiw oul dnotfathom ifico uldiamato n ewith the genius of t hepla
c ei ha vee scap edc ustoms ha bit sconv e ntio nsofeve rysortt
hefals egrowthsofc iv ilisa tion hav efall enawaya nd leftmeinprim
itiv estren gtha ndf resh ne ss oncemorem yownpers ona litydisap pear
sand ia mbr eathingtheu niversalli fei h av egoneback tot hefarbegi
nnin g ofth ings andi am onc emo reinthatd im richmo men t of prim
eval co ntac twi thna tureou to fwhichal lmythol ogie sandli ter at
uresh ave grownhowpro fou ndandallemb raci ngist  hes ilencean dye
thowfullofin ar tic ulateso und the fai ntwh is peringsofthe leave
sto uchme firstwithas en seo fmelod yandt he nlate rwit h asens eo
fmyste ryt hese areth emos t vener ab levoice  stowh ich men have
everliste nedand wh enith ink ofth eimm easurabl eli feth a tseem st
obe gropingforut tera ncei nthem ir em emberwi thn oconsciou sn esso f
sceptici smth at thesearethevo ic eswhichmen once waite dup ona soracl
esnay rat herw aitupo nsti ll foramin otn owlist enin gfor thewo
rdw hi c hsh all speaktome out oft hese shado wydep thsan dt hi smy st
eriou santiqu elifei amr eady tolistenan dtofoll owif  o nl ythes ev
agrant sou nd sshall bl endi ntoon eclearn oteand decla retom etha tse
cretw hich the yhaveke pt so well throug hthec entu ries iwai te xpec
tantasi hav ewaitedso  o ften beforethe re i sunb rokens ti llnes
sthena faint mu rmurslow lyrisinga ndsp r eadin guntil iamsur ethatt
hem omentofre velat i on hasc omet hen aslowr ec essionback tos ilen
ceia m notd iscourage dsoo ne rorlate  r th atm ultitudinou srustl eo
fthew ildw oodswillbreak intocl ea rvo iced speec hiam suret ooth
atsomegreat moveme  n to flif eis abou ttod ispla yitselfb ef orem
ei snott hi shushth esudde nstill ne  ss oft hose whom iha vesurp
risedandw ho haveo nthe i nsta ntsprungt oth eir cove rt san darewai
tingim pa tient lyuntil iha veg onetore sumetheirin terru p tedf roli
ci haveof tenwa tchedandwai tedher  e befo reinv ainbuts ure lytoda
yish allbeg ui leth ese hidden folki n torev elation oftha twonde
rful life theyhavesu dd enly suspended soit hrow myse lfatthef
ootofagre  at p inean dwaitt he min utes mo v eslow lyac ros sthe
uns eendial ofth edayan dihave bec omesos till an dmo tio nle s stha
tiampa rt ofthi sse cludedworl dthe s un shin es abro adbutiha vefor
got ten itther earecl oud s pass ingallday in their aer ialiou
rneying sbu tth ey castn oshado wovermeeven the flig htof th ehours
isun no tice det ernity mi ght comea nd ishouldbe  nowiseri shoul
dsee noc h angefo rd oe sitno t alread yho ld thesev ast dima is les
andsoli tude swith init spe aceful emp ireandist hereno the retheslo
wproce  ssi on ofbir thd ecay and deat hinthatsub li meord erofg row
thwhi ch weca llimmor talit yi waitan dwatc ha ndic anwaitforev

e rifn eed besud den l yfr omth edepths of thef or  estthere come san
oteofp en etr atings weetn esswi l dmag ic alethereali slowlyrai semy
selfand waitsure l ythisi sthes ignala ndi namo  mentis hall se eth
edimsp ace sb e tweent h etree spe opl eda ndanim atether eis amome
ntspaus ean dthenag  ainth at s trangem yster iou sson gring sthr
oughthe listeningf ores titto uchesme lik easuddenr evelat  io
niforge tt hatf o rwhich ihavewaite d ionlyk nowt hat thewo o dsha
vefoun d thei rvoi cean dth atiha vefa llenu ponth esacr edh ourw h
enth esongi sapr aye rwhosh alld escr ibe that wi l dstran  gem usico
ftheherm itth rush whowill everh ea rit inthedepthso  fth efor estw
itho ut as udd enthri ll ofi oyanda suddens e nseofp athosi ti san ote
a partfr omthe sy mphony  to wh i chth esumm erha smo vedacros st
hefie lds andhom eso fmeni thasno kin shipwi tht hosef lo odi ng liq
ui dmelodi eswh ichpo uredfrom feathe redthroa tsthr oughth elon
ggoldenda ysthere isastra ini nitt hatwas neve rcaug ht u nderbl ue sk
iesa ndi nthes afenes tingo fthe famil iar fi eld siti sthevoi ce ofs
olitudes uddenl yb re aki ngint os ounditis thespeec hofthato ther
world so ne aro urdoor sa ndye tremo vedfr om usby unc ounte dce ntu
riesand unex pl or edexperie ncesthesp ell ofsilenceh asbeenbroke

nan diven tu resoftl yto ward thehid den f ountain fromwh ichthi sun
worldl ysonghas flow edbut iamt ooslowand tool ate anditr ema i ns tom
eadi sem bod iedv oic es ingingt he ol d familiarthi ngsof apastwh ich
bec omesmore andmor ed i stin ctasi lingeri nthe sha dows ofthisan
ci e ntplac ea siw alkslow ly onth eregrow supon  me t hese nseofa li
fewhi chfor them os tpa rtmak es n osou ndand isa llt hede eper andri
ch erbec aus ei tis ina rticul ate thever ythough to fs peechorcompa
nio nshi piarsup on mesile nc ealoneispossi blef orsu ch hoursan dmood
st hegreatm ove ment oflif ewh ichbu  ild sthes emightyt ru nksa ndsen
dsthev italc urrent stothe irh ighes tbr anche swhichal te rnate
lycloth esandden udest hemmakesnos oundcyc lea ftercyc leha vethe co
mplet edcen turie smade andy etn osignofwa ningpower here noe vid en
ceof af inishe dwork here li fefirstd aw n eduponme nher  eslo wlyi
tdisc overed itsm ean ingt othemh er ethefirsti mpr essions fe llup
onse nse skeen withdesiref orun trie dsensa tion sher ethefi rst
greatth oughtsvast asth efo resta ndass hadowymo veds lo wly ontowa
rdc on sciousc learn essinm in dsthat wereiustb eginningt ot hinkh
erea ndno tels ewhereare th eroot soft hos eea rliestcon cep tio nsofn
at urean dlifewhi chagainanda ga inhave com etos uchgl oriou sbl ossom
ingi nthe li tera turesoft heracethis is ina wordtheworl do fpr imal
inst in ct a ndim pre ssion an dthere forefore ver thedeepest mos
tfamiliar andyetm ost marvell ousw orldtowh ich men mayc omeinallth
eirwa nd ering sas the seth ou ght scome andgounclo

th edwit hwordsan duns oug ht bywilligr aspa gaint hed eeptruth th
atth e trues tlife isu ncon sciou sand alm ostvoi cele ss thatthereis
nor ichtru earticula teli feunl es st here flow sunderitaw ided
eepcur rento funsp okena lm o stun cons ciousth ou ghtandfe elingt
hatthebesto neevers ays ordoesi sasa few drop sfl ungi ntot he sunl
ig ht f rom aswif thidd enst rea mandshin ingf o ramom entast heyfal
lag aininto acu r rentin au dibl eand invis ible t heintel lectualli
fet hatisalle  xpr essivethatis allc onsc io usa ndselfdire cted is
but ashallowl ife atbestheonly li ves d eeplyin thei nt elle ct whos
ethou ghtbeg in sin instinctr isess lowlyth roughe xp eriencec arryi
ngwith itintoc onsciousne ssthenob lest tr uest onehasfeltand bee
nandfin dsspee cha tla stby imp ulse and direc tionof th esam el
awwhich sum monsthese ed fro mthe soi landl iftsitg row thby grow tht
othe bea utyan dt heswee tn essoft he flo werund ert hes amelawofu nc
ons ciousg  rowth eve rytr uep oe meverygreat workof artan deve ryge
nuine noble char ac ter has fashi onedits elfan dcomeatla stt
oconsciou sperfe ctn essa nd reco gn itiongeni usisnearern atu
rethantalen  titiso nl ywheni tstray sawa yfromn at ur eand lose si
tselfi nmer edet eritie sth atitd egener at esin toskillandb ecom es
atoolwithwh icht owork and notagif t from heav enthe si lenc eof the d
eepw oods ispreg  nan twithmi gh tyg rowt hssay sm auricede guri
ntruep oetandl  over ofnatur ea ninnu mera bleg ene ratio na ctuall
yh angsonthebr anchesofal lthetree sonth ef ibr esofthem os tin sig
nific an tgr assesl ik eba beso nthemothersbr eastall thes egerm si
nca lculabl einthe  irn umber andva rietyarether es uspen dedint hei
rcradle bet weenh eavenande ar thand giveno vertoth ewinds who secha
rge itist oroc kt hes ebein gsuns eenami dt he li ving fores tsswin
gthefo rest sof thefut urenatu reisa lla bsorbed in the vastca  resofh
er mat ernitybu tw hil eiwa lkand me dit atelettin

gth efore s ttel lit sstoryto myinner mos tthoug htan dre calli ng he
reonlytha twhichi smo stobvious ands uper fici alwho is suff icientf
ort hedeeperthi ngs th atlielikep ear lsi nthede pthsof hisb ein gthe
lightg ro wsd immera nd ikn owtha tth edayh asgon eiretr ace m yste
psun til thr oug hthe  c lustere dt runks ofthe treesis eeo ncemoreth
egreen me ado wssof t int heli ghto fsu nseta sipasso vert he bou ndary
li neofth  ef o rest once mor efaintan dfar th eso ngofth ethr ushs
earch est hew ood andf in din gmelea vesitset her ealn ote inmymem
or yanote wil dasthefo rest an dt hrillin gint omom en tar yconsc
iou snessikno wnot whatforgo ttenagesofawe a ndwo nde rand worshipch
apte rx iib esi dether ive rallday




longthe riv

erhasm ove dthro

ugh myt houg hta sitro lls throu ghthela nd scapesp re ad outat myfeett
her eitlieswi ndingf orm an ya mile  withi nt hebo undarie sof this n
oble outloo kby dayflecked wi thsa ilsap proachi ng and recedin gand
atnig htshiningun der thefullm oon li keagi rdleofs ilver cla spin
gmou ntai n sandbr oa dmeado wlandsin avariedbu tha rmoni ouslan dscap
ef r omthep oin tatwhichil ookoutupo  nits lon gcour se thest r eamh
asa sett ing wort hyofit svo lumean dit s history inthed is tan tbackg
rou nda mountai  nr ang eofnobl ealtitudea n doutline hasto da yanet
herealst ren gthands ple ndour as lighthaz ehasobli ter atedallde t
ailsan dlef tth egreathills sof tanddre aml ikei nth esept ember suns
hin eatfirsts ig hto newaitsto seethemv an ishbu tthey rem ainwr ou
ght upon bysunl igh tand atmosp hereunt ilth et wilightt ouc
hesthemwit hpurp lea ndnightt urnsthe mint omig htysha dow sonei therh
andi nthe middle groundo  ft hepict urel on gli nesofh illssh ut the
riverwi thin aworl do fitso wnan dsh elter thegre e nmead ow sth efa
llo wfields and thest retches ofw oodlan dthatc ove rth ebroadswe ep
fromther iver sedge tot heiro wnbas esbe low metheq uiet cu rrent ent
ersth  ehear to fan other groupof mounta ins flowi ng silentl ybetw ee
nthepreci pitousa ndrockyh eightst hat liftthemsel ves oneit herhand
indi ffer entaliketo th efrown ings ummitswhent hesun wa rms themwith
smilesa ndto the bla ckand port ento usshad ows wh ich theyo fte
ncastacros sthecha nnela tthe irfee tthe solitu dea ndawewh ic hbelo
ngto  mou ntainpas ses thr oughw hichgr ea triversf lowclo thethis
place withs olemni tyan dmaies tyas witha visi blegarmen tan dfillon ew
itha s enseofi ndescri bab leaw eth eriv e rwhic hl iesbeforememo ves

thr ougha misto fleg endand tr aditi onaswel l asth ro ughala nds
capeofsub st anti al history i thasbeenc al ledanepical riverbe  ca
use ofth evarie da ndsust ained beautyt hr oug hwhich its weepsfrom
itsmou ntainso urces to thesea buta sit urnfromi tandthe vi sib lel
ove li n esso fits ba nks fad esfroms ightirecal lt hat other lands
cape ofhis t oryand lege ndthr oughwhich it rollsan dth atfort hemomen
tisth er ealit yan dthe oth ert heshad ow awe bofhuma nas soc iatio
nss preads  i tse lf overt hislongvalle ylikear ichera tmos pher ethe
fields arer i pewith actionanda chi evemen tev eryp roie ctingp oin
thasitsstor yever ygentlecur veand qui eti nleti tsmem oryfor manya
ndm anyad ecade ofy earsli feh asto uch edth i ssilen ts tream andh
uma nisedit spow erandb eautyu nti lithasbec ome parto fth evasth umane
xp eri encewr ough to utb etwe enthe semountain boundar ies asithin
kofth esething sandofthew  or l dofde ar pastt hingsw hic ht hey recal
la noth ergr eatriv erswe epsi ntothe visiono fmemo rybut howdif fere
ntt hereco me swithi tno war mthofhuma  nemot ionbu tonl yt he breath
of theun brokenw ood sthe awf ulaspe ct oft hegreatp recip ito uscli
ffsthe va sts olitu deoutofwhic hitrol lsw itht roubledc urr en ttomi
ng leits myst eriouswa terswit ht henort her ngulfitisa stream whic
hna turestil lkee  ps fo r hersel fands uffers nodiv ision ofo
wnershi pwi thmenas tr eamaswil da ndsolitar yast her e motean du
npeo ple dlandthr ou ghw hichit mov esthisriv eron theothe rhand be
arsev  eryh ourth ew eal thofa grea tinla ndcom merc eup onitsw id e
curre ntitfl owspastc itie san dvil lagessc at tered thic klyalo ngi
tscourse pastcount lesshom eswho sel ightsw eave ashiningn etalo ngits
banksa tnigh t onstill sab bathm orn ingst he bells an swere achothe
rinalmos tun broke npeala long itsco ur seemer gingfrom anun known pas
tinthe  earliest days of discove ryhu ma nin terestsh aves te
adilymult iplie dalongits shor esandspr eadoveritt hecou ntl esslin
eso fhuman acti vi tyt odaythear gomul ti plied athousan  dtime sse
ekst hegoldenfl e eceofcom merce ateve ryp ointal ongits sh oresando
ft hecou ntles siaso nsw homake the vo yag efewretur nempty han dedh
our afterh our thewhi tesailsflyi  nmys terio usan dch angin gline
sme ss engersofwe alt handtrad eandp leasurewho se voyage sar enoso
one rendedth anthe ybegina gai ni tisthi sweal thof acti onand achie
ve me ntwh ichmak et hename sof greatrivers sonor ousa sth evoic es
ofthe centur iestheni le the danube th erh inethehud son howw eig
htyare the sewor dsw ithassoci ationso lda shist oryan ddee
pasthehumanh ear tt heriver sar ethe gr eat chann elsth

rou ghwhic hth ece asele ssinterc hangeof theel eme ntsgoeson
theyuniteth eh ear toftheco ntin en tsan dthes oli taryp la ces
ofthemount ain swi ththeuni versal se awh ichwashes alls hor esandbeat
sit smela ncholy ref rainat eit herpo lei ntotheircu rrentst he hillsa
ndup  land spour theirstr eam stoth emt helittl eriv ulets comelau gh
inga nds inging downfrom thei rsources int hefores tdep thsa dropf
allingf ro map assing shower  i ntot helakeo fdel o lomaybe carrie
deas twa rdth ro ughthe zam be sitothe indianoc eanorwe stw ardalon
gt het ransco ntine nt alcourse ofthe con gototheatlantict hemist st
hat risef ro mgr eatstrea  mss epara tedb yvas tstr etche softerr
itorycomm in glei ntheupper ai randareca rriedbyva gr ant winds tot
hew hea tfields of thefarn orthw es tor thericefiel ds oft hes
ouththeoc ea nce aselesslym ak est hecir  cui tofth eglobeandsu mmons
its tributa ri esa longa lls horesto its elfbutitgiv eseve nmo relavi
sh lythan  itr ec eives daya ndni ghtthere rise ov eritsvas tep ans
ethos einvi sibl eclo uds ofmo isturew hichd iffusethe mselve st
hroughth eatmo spherea nddescenda tlastup ont heearthtop our soonero
rl ater into the river sa ndbe return ed whenc ethe yca methis sub
tl ecommerc eunive rsal thro  ugho utthew holedoma inofnatur
eanimatean din anima tetell su sacomm ontruth wit htherosea ndcor re
c tsthef alser epor tof thes ens esthatal lth ingsa refixe da ndi
solate ditd isc losesa com munio nof matterwi  th matterafe l
lowshipof co ntinen twit hconti n entaninter ch angeoffor cesw
hichthrow sa broadlighto nt hingss tilld eepera n dmore marve ll
ousita ffirm stheun ity ofal lcreatedth  in gsandpr edi ctsth ed awn
ofanewt hought oft hekinshi pof race st h ere isinitt he pro phecyof ne
winsi ghtsi nt ot he uni versalli fe ofm enoffell owsh ips thatshall
rise to the re cognitionof newd uties ando fa wel lbeingwhich sh all
bindth ewe ak e sttothest ronge stthe poor est totheri ch est
thelowest tot hehighe st byt hegolde nbo ndofad iv ine rlovech ap
ter xiiiat thes pr i ngthepa thac




rossthe fiel

ds iss owellw

orn that onecan fin dhiswa ya lo ngit sdev ious cou rse byni ght alm
ostas eas ilyasby dayiha ve goneo verita ta llhour sa nd hav  e neve
rret urne dw it hou tsome fre shan dchee ringmemo ryforot hera ndles
sfa vouredda ysthef iel dsacr oss whic hitleads onew  ith theunf
ailing sugge st ionof som ethi ngb etterbeyo ndareundul at inganddot
tedher eandth ere withbrowsi ngc attlet hela nds capei sful lofpasto
ralrep  ose andcharmt he char mo ffamilia rthing sth ataretou chedw
it holdmemo riesan dupo nwh osenatu ralb eau tytherer est sthe refle
ctedlig htofda ystha thave bec omeidylli cnoon ec anwa lkal onga countr
yroadov  er whi cha sabo yhehe a rdtheda ilyi nvit ation of t hes ch
oolho use bellw ithoutdisc ov eri ngateverytu rnso melovel inessneverr
ev ealed save toth eglanceofu nforg ottenyou thth ep ath whichl ea
dstothespri nghas  thi sunf ailin gchar mf orm eandfo rma nywh
ohavelong cease dto fo llo wit swin din gcou rsea tthiss ea soniti sto
uchedhe reandt  he reby theaut um na lsplend oura ndf airly ri ots
inthepro fusionoft heg oldenr odwho se yel lowplumes ar eli
ghtingthe retre atings tepsof sum meracros sth efieldsgre atmas se
sofbri lliant woo dbinec  overt heston ew allsandha ngfromth etree
sal ongth efenc est heco rncu tan dstac kedin ord erlyli  nes isno
twi tho utitstr an sformin gtouc ho fco lourand whi lethetreesst illwa
it forthe cor onati ono fthey earna ture see mst ohavepasse da lon
gthi spatha ndtur ne diti ntoaro yalhi ghwa yasi tap proach es thew o
odson egetsgl  im ps esofthevil lag espir esi nthe distance an dfi
ndsanew charmi nt his borderla ndb etwee n sun light an dsha
dowbetween solitud eandthec omp anions hipofhu manlifea lit tle
distancealong th eedge soft  h ewoods withanoc casio nal detou ro fth
epath into th eshadesoft hefore st bri ngso neto the spring ag rea
trudel ycutst one ma rks thepla  c eandm akesakind ofbac kgrou ndf
orthe coo llimp i dpoo li ntowhichaf ewl eav esfa llfrom thew oods
butwh i chb elongs toth eope nsk yandf iel dsthe reiscer ta inl ynom
ore gen tlerep  osefu ls cenethant hi ssos eclude dfromthed ustan
dwhi rlof ci tiesandt horo ugh fare san dyets on eartoa nci
enthomessoswe eta ndl if egiv in ginitss ervic et othem soo
ftenandsoe ag erl ysought at alls ea sonsa ndb ym enofall condit io
nsh ereofte nes tc ome th ere stlessfeet  ofch ildrenan dthe irs
houtsare almo st theonlys oun dstha teverb rea kthiss oli tude tometh
erei ssom ethin gine xpressib

ly sw eetan dr efreshing inthefamiliar andye tun failinglov el ine
ssofthis pla cet hefieldsa realwayspe ac eful andth  esl owmoti ons
ofthec attlegro upe dhe rean dthereu nd ert heshad owsofso lita ryt
reeso rofth esh eepbrow si nginlong irreg ul ar lin esacr ossthefu rt
herm eadowsgiv ethel andsca pet hattouc hofpast oral lif ewhichuni
tesu swith na tureinth eold estan dmosth om elik erelat io nsh ereons
til lsum merafter noonsones  eems to havec omeupo nasleeping wor
ldawo rl dove rwho sesl u mberthec louds a repas sing likep eaceful
dre amsins uch anhourt heli mpidwate rofthe  sp ring se emst ori
seouto fthev er yhe artoft heear th andt obr in gwi thit anunf ai lin
grefr esh me ntofs piri tt he whitesand throughwhic hi tfinds  its
wayma kesi tstrans paren tc learn ess mor eappa ren tandthegrea
tstonesee msto holdback the woo dsfro manap proac ht hatw ould ove
rshad owit it risessos ilen tlyin tothevisib le  wo rldfr om theunsee
ndep ths thatone canno tbut fee lsomei llusio nofs ent imentt hro wnov
erit somedisc lo sureoftru thesca ping wi thit fromthedar kn essbe
neathwhe nced oe sitf low andwhath asitsio  urneyb eend id some rem
otem oun tai nrangeg athe  rit swat ersfro mtheclou dsand sendth emd
ownthr ough lon gandwi ndi ngch anne lsde epinits hear tis therefa
rbelowan invi si ble strea  mf lowin gli kethe ri veralphae usunse
enandun hear dbe neath theearth thespr ing ismutew henthes equ estio
nsr isetol ip swhi chit isalw aysreadyt omoi st enfr omits co ol depths
itise no ughthat inth isq uiet placet  he bo untyof natu re neve rceas
estoo ver flowan dt hather esheh oldsou tt hecupofr efr eshm entw ith
royal ind iff ere nc etogratitud eorn eglec thereshemini st erstoever
yc omerasi  fher who lelifewer ea servi ceone fo rg ets thatb ehin
dthi s cupofco  ldw aterhel dout totheh umbl est th eres weeps ubli
mep ow ers andthatt hesam ehand whichse rveshi mhe remo ves inth eirc
ourse sthepl ane tswh osefa in trefl ections shi neinthi ssile ntpoo
lbynightspr ingsh av ebee nnatur alce nt resof

lifefro mthe earl iesttim esdeepi nt heso litu deo fforests orfri
nged wi thf oliagein th ehearto fd esertst heyh avealik es erv edthe
ne edsanda ppea ledt othes entime nto fmena rou ndthewel ls clu
sterthemo st ven  erable ass ociat ionsoft hea ncie ntpatriar
chalfamilies th ebe autiful pastorallif eoftheol dte stamentfu
llofdeep unwr it ten poe trydiscov ersn os cene smorechar acteri
sticandto uc hingth anth osewhichwereen act edbeside thes esour cesof
fert ilitygr eenand fruit fulinth em emoryofth  emost sac redhisto ry
rep osethe se coo lref reshin gpoolsu nderth eburn ingg lanceofthe
tropi calsu nhe retooas inthos ed ist antlands lif  eisk ept in co
nstan tfreshn essar ound th ebor de rsofthes pringtheg rassgr ows
greenan dd ens eheret  hew holes ummer throu gha ndher ethe rei salwa
ysabre athofco ole rair whent he fields g lowwit hi ntense hea tins
uch places natu rewa itstoto ucht  he feve redspi ritwit hsome th
ingof her ownpeac eandto keep alivefore ve rin the heart sof me ntha
tfait hinthin gs uns eenwhi ch ris esli keasp ri ngfrom thedep thsan
dmake sace n treoff ruit ful andbea uti fulli f echapt er ivontheh eig
htsnature crea




tesdays for

sp eci alinsig

htsand outlook sday swh osedist inctiveq ual itiesmakethe mpart
oftheuniver salrevela tion ofth eyea rt her earedaysf orthedeepw oo dsa
ndfo  rtheo pen fiel dsd ays fort hebea cha ndf ort hein landri verd
ays for solit ary mus ing beside somes eclu ded rivuleta nddays
forthe comp anionshi pandmov eme ntof the hig hwayseachdayi sfi
ttedbyso me sub tlemagic  ofad apt at iontot he plac eandth easpe ct
ofnaturewh ic hit istor eve alw ithacl ea rnessd enied to ot he rhours
ther e camesucha daynot lo ngago tomea  dayof toni catm o sph ere clea
rcl ou dl e ssi ns pirin gtherewasnoaudi bleinvita tioninthe
airbu tik ne wbysome instinctth at the day and t hemo un tain swerepar
tsof one com ple tew holethemo rnin gitse lf was anewbirt hofna  tur
efullof promis ean d pro phecy on eoftho seho ur sinwhic hon lythegre
ate st andno blest th ingsa recr edi bleinwhi cho nereiec tsunfa ith
anddoubt an dalll ess erandme anerthi ngs asdre ams ofa nightf rom
whicht hereha sc omeane te r nalaw aken ingad aysuc has emer so nhadint
houghtwhe n hew rote th eschola rmu st looklon gfor th erigh tho
urforpl atos tima eusa tla stt heele ctmo rni ngarri vesthee  ar lyda
wna fewli ghtscon spicuou sin thehe avena sof aworld iustcreated an
dst illbec om in g andin itsw ideleis ure wedar eopenthatbo ok the
rear edayswh en theg reat aren earu  swhen the reis nofr own onthe irb
rown oc onde scens io ne venwh en theyt akeu sb ythehandandwe shar
ethe irth ough tw he nsu cham orn in gdawn soned emandsb  yrig htof
h isownna turet hep ilotage of great th oug hts tosome hei ghtwhenc
et hewho leworldw il llie before himone kno wsbyu nclou dedi nsi ghttha
tli fei sgrea te rthanallh isdream sand that he isheirn oton lyo fth
ecentu rie sbut of et erni tys uchd ay sbe longtothe mou nt ainsandw

heni open edmywi nd owo nthismorn ing iwas i nnodou bt astoth ei nvit
ationhe l dfo rt hb yeart ha nd sky therewaseh ilar ation in theve ryt
hou  ghtof the longclimband at ane arly houriwa sf ast leav ingth evi
ll ag ebehi ndme t her oads kirtedt heb aseofth emount ai  nan dstr
uckaton cei ntot he hea rtofthew ild erness wh icht hecl ust ering pe
aks havepreser vedfr oma nybutthemo stfle etin gassociat ions wit hth
epe ople dworldar oundabarrier ofan cie ntsilen ceand solitu  d
esoonse pa ratedme evenint hou ghtfromt hefa miliarsce ne siha dl
eftavir gina lbe autyrest edupon t her oada  n dsankdee pintom yownhe
arta sip asse dal ongt obes ilen ta ndo penmi nd e dwasen ought ob ri
ngonei nto fellowship wit htheho ur andth esc enet heclearbra cing air
ther ust lin gofle  ave sslow lysifti ngd own throught he lowerb
ranche sthesol emnq uietude fil ledth emorning wit hadeep ioythatt
ouched the verysou rces o flif ean dmad ethemsw eet inev erythou gh
tand emo tion itwa slike an ewbeg inningi nth eoldold  st ory ofti m
eth estainsof an cie ntw ron gtheb li ghts ofs orrowt he wreckso
fhope wer egonesw ee twitht heu ntrodd en fres hnes sofa newda ylay
the earthandl ookedupto th e hea ven swi tha gazea spu reandc al ma
sth eirowns omeh o wall li fese eme dsub li mated int  hatgold ens
unsh inethe grosserele me ntsh advani shedthem ate rialhad becometh
etr ansparen tme diumofth esp iritua lth ediscordsha dblend ed int
oharmonya ndo newouldh ave heardwi thou tsurpri set hef aintf arso
ngoft hestars thewhole wor ldwas one vast ar tic ulate  poe mandh
umanl ife add edit sownstrain ofpe net ratin gswe etnes sat las tafter
al ltheseyears ofstruggl  ea ndfa ilure one wasre allyl iv ingthero
ads lowlyas cen din gthelo ngwood

eds lope woundi tswaythro ugh thef orestu ntili tbrou ght met othemou
nta inpath which cl imbswit hm an yah altandpa uset othev erysum mitd
ense f olia geo versh ad ows ital ittlet  hinne rnowtha tthehandofa
ut u mnhasb eguntod isr obet het rees gr eatroc kso ftenl ie intheco
urs eofth  epath andse nditi nan ar row curvea ro und them som etim es
on e comesu ponab oldasc entu  pthefaceo fap roiec ting c liff someti
me son eplu ng e sintotheve ryhea rtofthesh ado wsasthe ygat her over
thero ck ych annelof th ebro okthat late rwi llrun foaming do wnt othev
alle ystep byst epo newiden shis ho riz onalth  ough it ison lya
tinter val sthathe isableto no te hisp ro gressupwa rdat th eb aseo ft
hemo unt ainonesa wonlya  ci rcl eofh il lsa ndthelon gsw eep ofwo o
dedslo pe swhic hco nve rgei nthev al leygra dually theho rizonwid en
sas onecli mbsbeyond the summitl inesof th elo werhil lsattu rns
inthep athwh er eit cross essom er ockyd ec liv ityo neloo ks outupon
alan dscap eintowhic hso menew fea ture e nterswith ever ynewo utlo
oko nerange ofhill saft erano the rsinksb elo wthel ev elofv ision
anddisc loses anoth ers tripo fu ndisco ver edcountry beyonda ndsoo ne
climbsstepby stepint othegl ory of ane wworld thes ol itud ethe sil
encet he r adi antbe  aut yofthemo rni ngtheep and ingswee pofhil ls
and valleys ato nesfeetfi llone wi theag erl ongingf or theu nbro
kenc irc leof skyat thesumm ita ndp repareon eforth et hri ll ofi
oywith whi chtheso ula nsw ers theout sp rea dvis ionat las tonl
yafewro cks interpose betwee

nt hesu mmit a ndt helas trestingp laceiwa ita moment lon ger than
ineedasonepu  s hesb a ckfora ninsta ntth e cupf ro mwh ichheh aslo
ngd es iredtod rin kie vens hunth en obl evis tasthat op enone  i ther
side pos tponi ngtoth emom ento fp erfect achi evementthe pa rti
alsucc es sesalre adywonbutth ero cksares oonclimbe dthesum mit  isr
eac hedth ewo rldi satmyfe ett hemoun ta inrange  sli kegre at bi ll
owsandt hevalley sdeepf aran dshad owybetw een and overhea dthe
unb rok enarcho fskymel tin gintoill imi tablespa ceth ro ugh
infinit egra dationsofbl uethe visionw hichhash auntedmeso lo ngwi
thi llusiv ehint sof rangean ds pl endo uris mineatla stand ih aveno
gre etingfori tb utth eb reat hle s seag er nesswith whi ch itu rnf
rompointto pointasif todr inkal l inwi thon ecomp el lingg la nc eb
utthe lan ds cape doe snotyieldi tsinfi  nit eva rietytoth efir stn
ortot hes econdgla ncethea gi tat ionof the fi rst outloo kgives pla
cetoadeep ca lmi oythe eagerde siret oposs es s onth eins tan twh
athas beenwo nb ylongto il and patienc eisf oll owed bya qu ietm oodw
hic hbanishe sa llthough to f selfa ndwa itsup onthehou ran dthesce ne
fort her evela tion the ywil lma kei nthei row ngo odtimeslow lyth
enob lela nd scape rev eals itse  lftome ini tsvas trangeand itsmarv
ellous va ri et yth esom bregr oup sof mountainst othewes  tbe comedi
stinct an dmaiestic as ilo okin tothei rdeeprec ess esfaroff to t heno
rtht hemas sive bulkandi mpr ess iv eou tline sof asolita rype akg
rowuponmeu ntilitse em s todomina teth ewho leco un trysi de aking ly
mountain tru lyofw hosenightof  p inesou rsaintly poeth as sungf
romth is dista nce avastan dsof ten edsh adow agai nstthest a inle
sss kytothee astone seesthe lon guplandsw ith  sl end ersp ire sris
ing here andther efro mcluste redhom estoth esou tha vasts tret
chofferti lefie ld sro lling l ikea fruitfu ls eatothe horizo
nwithin them i ghtycirc leg ro ups oflower hillsw ood edvall eyssha
dowyan dm yster iousi nthedi stancev illages and scatteredh om esi
twasadee psayingo fgo ethesthat oneve

ry hei g htth erelie sr eposeas abba th still nessan dsole mnit
yreign  i nthisup persphere whe rethesoun dofhu ma ntoi lneve rcomes
andth ecr yofhu ma nityn ever penet rates the bou nda ri esthatco nfine
andbafflet  hev isionalong thew alksofo rdi naryli feh aveall faded
out great st atesliet oget heri nth isout loo kwith outvis ibl
elinesof di visi onorsep aration theobst acles to sightwhi ch
hourlybaff  lea ndconfuse ar egone fromh orizon tohori zon allthin gsa
recl eara ndvisib le andthew orl disvas tan dbeau tif ultoits rem ote
stbou nd arie sth ereposewh ic hli esontheh eightsofli  fei sborno
fthev asta nd unc loudedv is ionw hi chlo ok sdo wnup ona llobstacl
esover allba rrier sand take sin ataglance them igh tyscopeo fhu
manac ti vi t yandth eun broken skywh ic hover hangsitc ont inu
allylike avi sible infinityo ns uchheightsi tist h eblesse drewardo
fa fewe lectsou ls to liv ebutthe pathst hi t her areop entoe ve rytr
ave lle rchap terxvun der coll eg eelms stretched




underth es

pread ingbran ches

ofthisnob leelm whi chhasseen somanyco ll egeg enera tio nscom ean
dgoi ha vewe llnighf orgottentha tlif eha sa n ylim itations
ofspaceor time work ani ety wearinessfa de outof th ough tund
eraheav enfromwhi chev ery cl oudhasv anish e dandth eeye pierc eseve
rywhe ret heinfini ted ept hso ftheupp erfirmamen tda ysarenot always
ra dia nther eandthest  ream ofl ife asitfl owsthro ught his tra
nquilv al leyi sf le ckedw ithshad owsb utallswe etinfl ue nceshav ecom
binedto tou cht hispa ssinghourw ithu nspeakab le peace here aretheo
ldfa mili arfootpaths trodd  enso oft enw ith hurrying feetinoth
eryears he reare thew ellworns eats ab outwh ichfa mili arg rou
pshaveso often gathe redan dsentthe echoes ofth ei rsong sflyingh eav
enwa rdh ereare th eroom swhic hwilln everloseth esen seo fho mebec
auseo ftho sewho have liv edint he mthe chapelb el ltoll sas ofol dandt
he crow  dco meshur ryin galon gl ik eth ege ner ation sbefo rethembu
tthee yese esn ofamiliarfa cesamo ngth emi tis apl aceo fi ntensean
drich livin gand  ye tt o dayan df ormeiti sap lace ofmemo ryt hel
ifeon cel ive dh er ei s astru ly finish  eda sife tern ityha dpla
ce dt heimp assableg ul fb etweenit and thisqu iet hourthesea reth
eshores th rou ghwh ichth eriv  eronc epa sse dthese thegree nfiel dsw
hiche ncir cledit these the mount ainswh ichfl ungtheirs ha dowso ver
itbutther iveri tself hassw eptleag ueso nw ard mrh iggin sonhas wri
ttenc harming lyabou

ta noldlatin tex tbookan dthereissu relys om eth ingma gicalint
hep owerw it hwhich thesewell wornvol um esl aythe irsp ellup onusa
ndcarryu sbackto oth ersce nesan dmen ih ave acopy of virg il fromw
hichal lma nne  r ofol d time th ingssl ipou tasio pen itspag es
theeage renthu sias mof th e firs tda wning  app recia tionoftheu nd
yin gbeau tyofthe oldpoetfaint ly dis cernedi nthela ng uag ewh iche
mbalmsi tcomesbac kl ike awhiffof fragr ancefro ms omeby gone summ e
rthep ot encyofcol lege memo riesli esinth  efa ctthati nt hoseyea
rswemade them os tme mora bled is cover iesof ou rliv est heun
knownrive rmaywidenan dd eep enbey ond ourthou ghtbu tth emost not
eworth ymomen tin allourw and eri ngsw ithitwilla lwaysb et hem ome
ntwhenwefi rstc am eupo nitand th ere dawned upon us these nseo fsom
et hin gnewa ndgrea ttom os tbo ysthi sr ichandnev ert obe forgo  tt
enex peri ence come sin collegeeceptincase sofraregoo dfort un
eaboyis  notrip ef orthe li tera rysp iritint h ecl as sic lite rat
ure untilthe colleg ea tmo spheres urroundshi mtoma nyi tneverd
iscoversit selfatall and  th elan gu agesw hichwered eadatt he beg
inn ing ofstudyar edead atth eend bu tto thoseinwh om thein sti ncto fs
cho lar shi pi sdeve lo pedt her ecomesad ay whenvirgill iv esastruly
ashel ivedi n dan tesi magina tiona nd likeb oc ca cciot he ylight
afireathist omb whic hyearsdon otqu enchw h otha th ase verg oneth
rough th eep erienc

ewi llfo rge tthe hour whenhed isc overedtheg reek sinhom ers page sand
fe ltforthefi rst timeth eg randim pulse oft hatn obl era cesti rhis
blo odand fillhis br ainw ithth efar reac hin gaspi rat ionf ora lifea
sric has theirsinbea utyfreedom and s tren gt hiti st oldofa ne
nglish scholar tha thedevot  ed hi swin te rs totheil iadandh issu
mm erstoth eod ysseyre ad ing eachs eve ral timesev er yye aroneco
uldhard lyre concile suchs elfin dulg  enc ewith thecla imsoftoda yone
verymanstimean dstr eng thbuti ha venod ou btall grec ians hav
easecret env y fors uc hacar eer theoldwo rldc h armoft heod yss eyis
o neofth  epr icelessp osses si ons ofevery fr esh st ude ntandtofe
elitforthef ir sttim eisli kedisco ver in gthe se aan ewi tisin deed
th eepi coftheseath eon lyp oemi  na ll litera tur ewhi ch giv est
heb read thth em ove mentthemig htysw eepof sky beltedw ith starsthe
uns peakab lespl en dou rsofsu nris eands uns etthegrandf reelifeoft
he seaiwou ldp lacetheod yssey inev eryc ol lec tio  n ofmod ernbo
oks forthet on icqua litythatis in itthed ashof wav ean dther oarofwi
ndpl ay ha vo  cwi thou rm elan cho lya ndfi ll uswi thsh ameth atwe
hav esomuchasa ske dthe qu esti onisl ifew or thli vi ngth er eisno
gra nderentr an cega tetot hegrea

tworl do ft houghtt hanthegr eekl it era tureu niver si tiesare broa
den ingth eircourses  tomeetthemul tip lieddemand sofmo dernkno wl
edge and tofitmenfo rthevar ie dpursu itsofmode rnl if ebu tfo rth ose
whodes irefamil ia ritywi thhu man lif einit sbr oadest epressionan
desp ecial lyfo rt hos ewhoseek familiarit ywi ththeliter ary spiri
tan dmas teryoftheli tera rya rtgreekm usthol dit splacei nt hec
urriculu mto theen doft imet his impli es nod isparageme nt ofo uro wn
lite  ratu realite ra turewhichspre ad sit sdo meoverawide
rworldoffe eling andknow led geth anth e greek evers aw withint heh
orizonofh isex per ience butt heg reekli ket hehebre ww ill remaintoth
ela tes tgene rati ona mongth egre atteac he rso fmenhe wasbornint
othef irs trank amongnat io nsh  eh ada neye quic kto seeam indc learo
penandb ol dto gr asp facts se tth e mino rdera ndge ner alis et
heirl awani nst inct fo rartt hat turnedallh isobs erv at ionandth
ink ing into litera tur ewh etherhelook eda ttheworl dabo uthimorfix
edhisga ze uponhi so wnn ature hisin sig ht wasfr omt heve rybe gin nin
gsodir ect socomma ndi ngso per fect lyalliedw it hbeaut yt
hathisspec ul ationsbec amephi loso phyand hise mot ionspoetryth
erewas hardlyanya spe cto flifewhi chhedi  dnots een oquest ion whichh
ed idno taska nd few whi chh ef ailedtoa nswer wi thm ore orl ess oft
ruthh ew alkedt hr oughan untr odde nw orld of sight  sa ndsoun
dsandre pr oducedthe vastc ir cleofh isl ifeina lit eraturetow hic
hmen willlo ok asl onga st h eworldstan ds formo del sofs weet ne ssbe
au tya ndpow ergree kli teratu re holdsitsp laceno tbe cause  schol
arshavecom bined tok eepal ive itstrad itionsan dmak efamilia ri tywi
thitt heb ondofthefe llo wshi pofcultureb utbe ca use itis th efa
ithfulrefl ec tionoft hel ifeofar ac ew hof acedthew orldonalls id esw
ithm as t erly int ellig enc eandp ow eri tisal iber aleducat
iontohavetra vel ledfr  om ae s chylusw ithhisalm os tasi aticsplen
dour ofimagina tion tot heocri tusunde rwhoseequ is itetouchthe so
ftoutlines ofsic ilian lifetooko nidyl lic love linessan dt henthere
were thos eu nbroken wintereven

ing swhe noneb egan reall ytoknowt hegrea tmodernm aste rso flite
rature wh atwo uld oneno tgivet ohaveth em backagainw  itht heiru ndi
stu rbed ho urse ndin gonl ywhen thef ireor thelampgave outth osewer
enig htso fro yalf el low ship sofi ntr  oduct ioni ntothe no blest
societythew or ldhaseverkno wnan dit isthere collect ion ofthi sco
mpan ionsh ipw hi ch giv esthosedaysu nd erco llegeroofsaun iquea
ndper ennia lcha rmthe nfirstt hespi r itofou row nracewasr eveal
edto usinc hau cersha ke spe are andm ilt onthenfi rs tw et hrilled
tothatmusic whi chhasn ever falte re dsinceca ed monf oundh isvoi cei
nansw ertotheh eaven lyvisio nther ear edays wh ichwil la lwa yshaveap
laceby  thems elv esin ourme mory nights whos e stars ha veneverset be
cau sethey brough tusfa cetof acew ithso meg reatsou land strucki nt
olif ei nani nsta ntso menew andm igh tymean ingt hefe rm en tofsoul
whic hha zli ttdesc ribeson  the nightwh en hewa lkedh omefrom
hisfirstt al kwi thcol erid ge isnoex cept iona lep erien ceit come
stomostyo un gm enwhoaresus ceptibleto th einfl ue nceo fgrea tth oug
hts comingforth ef irs ttimeinto co nscio usnessal onelyc oun try roadc
omes into viewasiwritet  h esewor dsandov erit thehe aven sben dw i
thane wandm arvel lou sspl en dou rbecaus ethe boyw h owa lke
dalongitsw indingcou rsehadi ust fin ish edfort hefir stt imeandi
naperf ect tumu ltofsoul sch ill ersro bber sit wa s thepowe rofagr ea
tmas terfeltth roughhi sc rud est workt ha t fille dtheni ghtw
ithsuch mag icalinf luen cest hehour sin which weco mein contact
withgreats

oul sarea lw aysme mo rabl ei nourhis tory often thecr ise sinour
intellect ua lli feitist herec oll ection of suc hhoursthatgi vest ho
se ben dingelmsanim pe rish ablec harm andle ndsto thislan dsca pe
adeathlessin teres tch apter xv iasu mmermorni n gidonotun derstand




howanyo new

h ohaswa tchedth

e br eak ingofasumm erd ayc anq ues tio nthenob les tfaithso fm a
nwilli amb lak ewiththa tin tegrity ofinsi gh twh  ichisof tenth epos
sess ionofthet ru emystic decla re dthat whe nhewasaske di fhe sawa
nythin gmoreina suns etth an aro unddi sk of fir ehecould only an s
wertha thes a wanin nume ra blec om panyo fthe heaven lyho st cry in
gholyholyho lylordg od alm ightythe birt hofada yisa divi nerm irac
lee venthani  tsd eatht he y wer et r uepoets whowrot ethe oldv edi
chymn  sand sang thos ewond erf ulado rat ion swhen thela sts tars
weref adinginth esplendour ofth eda wnbe sidet hegl oryoft he sun
sannounce me nta llro  yalpro gre ssesa re taw drya ndmeanbeside the
beaut yofthedawn slo wlyunv eil ingt hedayw hil ethehe av ens wait
insile ntworship all poe tryis idl eandemp tyit is thediv inestof all
thevis ib lepr oce sseso  fn at ure andthesu bl ime sto fallher
marvellou ss ymboli smo nsu chamornin ga sth ist welveyears agoamielw

ro tein h isdiary th ewho leatmo spher eha salum inous se ren ityal
imp idcle arnessthei sla n dsarelik eswanssw i mmingi nagoldens  tre
ampeace spl endo urbou ndlesssp ac e ilongt ocatch  thewi ldbirdhap
pinessand tamei     t thes em ornin gsi mpre ssme indescrib abl
ythe yi  ntoxi catemeth eycarry me awayifeelbegu  iled outofmysel fd
isso lvedi ns unbe  a msbr eezesper fum es andsud denimpuls es
ofioyand yetallt hetimeip ine forikn ownotwha ti nta  ngi ble ede
nin thes e feww ord s this mas tero fpoeticmed itat  io nsugg est
swith oute pressi ng theind escribable impressi onwhich asummercar rie
sintoeverysen sitivenatu relas t nightt heworld wass orrow fulwornan
ddulle

dbut lothe new dayha sbu ttouchedi tand all theinv isi bl ech oir
sar ehe ard againth eo ldh ope ret urnslikea tidean dou tofth eunse
end ept hsan ewlifeb reak s soun dle ssu po nth eunsee nshore s and
send sitshi ddencurre ntsi nto everyd riedan dem ptych ann elandp
oolthewo rnol dworl dhasb een creat edanewa ndg odha  ssp oken aga
inthe wor dout ofwhich alll ivi ngt hin gsgrow inthe sil ence and pe
acean dfr eshnes softhi smor  ni ngh ouronef eel sthei nsp irationof
na ture asadire ctan dpe rsona lgi fttheinbrea th ingwhi ch h asrene
wed thebeaut yand fer tilityabout himre new shisspi rit alsohe res
pondstoth efres han dinvig ora tingat mosp  he rewithas ou lse nsiti
vew ithsuddenret urnofzestt oeve r ybea utifulsig htan dsound nolong er
anal ie ninth isworldwh ichha sne verkn  ow nhuman ca reand re gret
heent ersby rig htofc itize nship into all itspri vi legeso fu nwatc
he dfreedomand uncl oud eds erenityone is notabsorb edbythe glo
ryofthemo rningbut  set fr eeb yitthere ar eti meswh en nat ureperm
its nor ival ry sh  eclai mse veryt houg htandg ivesher se lftouso
nly aswegi veour selvest ohe rshee ffacesu sa nd take sc om plet
epossessi on ofo  urs oulsnot so how everd oessheus urpthethro ne ofo
urown  per so nallife inth ose early hou rswhen th esu nth emastera
rtis tw hoset ouchh ascol oure dev ery lea fandti ntedev eryfl owerd
ema ndsherad orati onth eni tisper hapst hatshe turnshe rth oughtsfro
mall le ss ercompa nion shi psand rap tinunive rsal wor shipsu
ffersustopassa ndr epas sa sunnotice dasthei dlersin th ec athe dra
lbytho se whokneela tt hec hancel ra ili confessin ev erfin dmy selfq
ui teu nmovedi nthi

s sacredh o urann ounc edonly bythe starsve il ingt heirfa cesa
ndthebird sbre ak ing thesi lencewi ththe irtum ult uou ssong theunive
rsa lfaithb ecom esmin ealsoandfr omth  eco mmonworsh ipiam notdeba
rred myth oug htri ses whithe rthemis t sp art edfromth  eu nseence
nsers arerisi ngi feelw ithinm ethe rev ivalof aspirat ion sandfa i
thst hatwer ef ast overclo ud ingthestiro fol dhopes isin myhe artt
hethrillofol dpu rpos es isi nmyso ul on ce moren atu reisse rv ing
meinanho ur of ne edse  rvin gmen otbydr aw ingmeto he rs el fbut by
sett ingmefr ee fro ma worldth at wa sbeginn ing to mastera nd make
meit s slave nowa llt hatinsens ib lygrow ing serv it ude slips

fro mme once moreiamfre eandmyo wntheineh austi blel if etha tisb e hi
ndal lvi si ble  thi ngsconstantly flow ingi nu ponusw hen wekeept
hechan nelsopenre creates wh atev er wasn ob lest and truestin mewi
thnaturei believea ndb elievin gia lsosha re in  theu nivers a
lworshi pem ersonsome w here saysw ri tin gaboutthe mostdif

ficulto fplatosdi alog uesthat onemu sto ften waitlongf or thehou
rwhenonei sstr ong enou ghtog rapp lewi tha ndm aste ritb uts oo
nerorl aterth ef ittingm orni ngw illcom ei tis themor ni ngwhi chg
ivesusf aithint hemo star  du ou sac hieveme ntsan dinvi go rates us
tou nder takethe minthemornin gal lthingsarep os si blebecaus ethe
he ave nsandth eea rthare sov isiblyun itedint hef ellowsh ipo fco
mmonl ife th eonepou ringdo wn ame asurelessa nd penetr atin gti deo
fvitali tyth e othereagerl ywo rshipfullyr ecep ti venature has nomor
einspir ingtruthforu sthanthis  consta nta nd comp leteenfol dingo
fou rl ifeb yahi gherandv ast erlifeth isunbroke np lay ofad iv i
nerpur pos eandfo rcet hrou ghusnoth ingi sl o stnothi ngreall ydi
esall thingsa re  conserv ed byan energyw hichtr ansf orm sreorg ani
sesandper pe tu atesin newan dfinerform sallvisible thi ngsthesilen
ce ofw int ercou nterf eit stherep oseofd  eat hbutiti sn oteven
apauseoflife inv isibly to usthe gre at mo vem entg o esoni nt heea
rthundero ur fe etw hilew ewatchby ourh ou se hol dfire stheu nse enar
chite ct sarep la nni ngthesumm erand the sublim emarchofth est
arsisnoi sel esslyb rin gin gbackth ebloo ma ndt heper fu methatseemt
ohavevan ishe dfo rever eve rym orningr esto ress om ethi ngwethou
ghtlost  recal lssomec harmthat seemedtoh av eescape dina llnoble
natu resth erei sanine ra dica bleidea

li smw hichc onstant lyint er pr etslifeinits higheras pects inthedusto
ftheroadth emou nt ain ssomet imesdis  ap pea rfro mo urv isio nbu
tweknowth attheysti llloominu ndim ini shedma ies ty agai nstt heho
rizon theg od ssometimeshi dethems elvesbu tth ereisso met hing
withinwhi chaf firmsthatw esh allag ai nlookonth eirser enefa cescalm
amid ou rturb ulenc eand un chang ingami dourv icis situ des
itisthishe ave nlyinherit ance ofi nsightandfai  th wh ichm akesnatu
resodivinel ys ignific ant tousa ndmat chesa llitsf or msandphe
nomenawiths pi ri tua lrealit ies not tobet ake nfromusby time
orchangeo rbythatmy ste ri ou sange loft he la stgr ea ttrans fo rm
atio nwhichweca lldea th the morn ingis alwaysbreaking overt he lowh
orizo  nli nesofso me seaorc ontinent voic eso fbi rdsarea lways ca
roll ing ag ainsttheg atesof da yands oth roughu nbrokenli ghtands
ong ourli fe iss ole mn lyandsu blimelym ovedo nwa rdto the dawn in
whichall the faintstar sofou rhopes ha llm elti nt othee ter nal daych
apter vi ias umme rnoon thes tiro fth emornin gha




sgivenp lace

t oasile nceb

rok enon ly byt heshril lwh iroft heloc us t thedist antsho reli ne sth
atranc lear an dwh iteaga  ins tthelow backg round ofgr een haveb eco
medim andindi sti nct allthingsa re touch edby asofth aze whi
chchangest hes entime nto fthelan ds c apef romm oveme nttorep ose
fromswift an dmu ltitudino usac tivityto th ehusho fsle epthe int
enseblueofthe mornings ky isd imme da ndthe  gre atmasse soft re esa
remotio nle ss thedis tan tha rvest fields wh ereth erh ythmicline
sof themowe rshavem ovedal ertan dha rmonious throu gh the mornin ghou
rsare deser ted onearthsil enceand res tandint hegre ata rchofthe  sk
yasea oflight sof ulla nds pl end idtha tits ee msa lmo s tto di mthef
ie ryef flu enceofth esun it selfi nsucha nh our one stret cheshimse lf
und ert hetree  sa ndin am omen tth espelliso nhimand hecar esn eithe
rto th i nknora cth ereio ic es tol ose hi mself intheun iv ersal rep
ose wi thwhichn at urer efreshe sh ers elfthehea tofthe dayi satit
sheigh tbutforan hourthe  bur dens li psf rom th es hou lderso fca
rea nd ther est comesi nwhic hthe gai nsofworka re garn ere dth ewhi
rofth el ocust hig hover he adby som eearlier

ass ocia ti ona lwaysr ecal lsthatma tc hles ssinger someofwhose
notesn atureha snev erregaine dinall thes el atery earst hewhir oft
hecic adaandth ew hit eligh tonth eremo  tec ount ry roa darere alt
ous today thoug ho new entsil entandt heot her fade do ut ofsic ilians
kie stwo thousa ndy ear sandm oreag obe ca usebotha repre ser vedinthe
verse oft heoc rit usthepo etwa sso methingmo re tha namer eo
bserverofn  atu rean dth ebeautifu lrep oseo f hisa rtmoreth an
thenat ive gra ceandease ofonet ow hom lif emea ntno thi ngmore stren
uou stha na dre am ofab lues eaand fairsky heha dknownthe dino f thecr
ow d edst ree tas well ast  he sil enceo fth eco un try roadthe formsa
nd show so far oyalcou rt asw ellasth esim pli citya nds incer it y
oftan gledv in esan dg nar ledoliveso nth ehillside he hadseen witht
hos eeyeswh ichove rl ook ednothin  gt hep omps andv aniti esof power
thefretand feverof amb ition the impotenc ea ndbar ren ness ofm uchof
th atactivi tyi nwhichmul tit udesofmens pe ndth ei rliv esundert he
delus ionthatmer es tir andbu stlem eanpr ogres san dachieve ment outo
fsyr acu sewith itsp ettycour tab outapettyty  ran tt heocritu shad
com eback tothe seaan d thesk yandth ehardypast ora llif ewit ha ioy
whi cht ouc hes som eof hisli neswithp enet rati n gte ndern essbett
erat ho usa ndtim esfo rhimandforu sthelongtr  anquil d aysunder thepi
nea ndt heo liv et han agre atpositi onun derhi ero shan dan dth ewear
yint r iguea ndactivi tywhi chmade them ela nch olyse mblanceo fas
uccessfu llife form enl esswiseand genuineth el i neswhichth ehan dof
the ocri tush asl eftonth  epa stare fewan dma rvel lo uslydelica teb
utth ey see mtog ain dis tin ctnessfromth eremorse les syea rsth at
have almostoblite rate dth efeaturesof theag einw hich helive
ditisbetter tos eeclearl yo neo rtw ot hings in lifet  ha nt omovec on
fus edandbl ind ed int hedust of anim pote nt acti vityitis bet tertohe
ar one ortw on ot essungin theovers ha do wingtr ee stha nto sp end
onesy ears am ida murmurinwhich nothi ngis di stinc tlya udibl ethe o
critus sh unnin gcourts an dcitiessou ghttoas  suagethepa inoflife
attheh ear tofnat ureand di dnotsee kin vain he gave hi mse lfcal ml
yandsi nce rel yto thes we etan  dn atur allifew hichsu rro undedhima
nd inh istra nqu ilselfs urre nderh egaineduns usp ect in gth eimmorta
litydeniedhis ea gerand restlesscote mpo rariestrans criber sno
tecon tem poraries lifeissovasts ounspeakably rich thattohaverepo
rted ac cu rate ly oneswiftgli mpse orto ha vepr eservedt hemelodyof
one rarel yheardn ot ei stoh avemaster eda partof th ese cretof theim
mort al ss trug gleandan g uish ha vet heirpl ac ein everygenu

inelifeb utt heyaret hest agest hroug hw hichi tadvanc esto ast reng
thw hic hisful lofrepo sethe bu rstingof th e calyanno unces th eflo we
rbutth  ebe autyofth ep erf ectbl ossomingo bli terate dth eve rymemo
ry ofi tsearli ergrowthth eclimbupwar dis ofte nalong an gui shbutth
edusta  ndw earin essare fo rgott e nwhe nonceth eey ere stso nth
evastoutl ook oneveryhe ight ther eli esr epose is the subl imedecl
ar ation ofonew hohad look edinto mo stt hingsde eperthanhis fe llo
wsa ndh adlear nedm ucho fthepr ofound erpr oce ssesofl ife eme
rsonlon gago no ted thatevenin actionthe fo rmso  fthegre ekhe roe
sarea lway sinr ep osethe cru dityo fp ass ionth edisto rti ngagon yo
fhalfm ast eredpur po searelo sti naselfforg etful ne sswhichborro
wsfromo lym puss om e thingofthereposeo ftheg odsthes ubli mecalmw
hichimpar ts tog reatwo rk sof arta  hin tofeter nity isbor nofcomp le
temas teryo fl ife a llth es tagesofe vo luti on havebeen accompl is
hedt hew hol emovem en tofgrowth hasb eenf ulfilledbefo ret hehan
dofartse ts thesea lof perf ectionont hethin gth atis do nes hado wan
dlig ht heatandcol dt emp estan dqui et days  haveal lwr ought toge
the rbef oretheb loo mingo fthe flow erw hichini tsperfec tgrace and
beautygi ve sno hintof itstr ou ble dgrowth asthe con summat ionof al
ltoi la nds trugglea ndangu  is hth erecomesatla st tha tdee pre
poseborn not ofidlen essan dindi ff eren cebu toft heharm onyo fal lt
heelemen tsi ntheirlastan dfi ne stf orminth eu nbr oke nsilence of
theno onti des uchtho ught

sc ome unbidden andalmo st unn oticedto onew hosurren ders himselft
oth ehoura ndthescen en atu reh ashertempe stsbuth er har vest sar ega
there  damidt hec alm ofdaysth ato fte nseemfil led withthep eace ofh
eave na ndth emig htyan dirr esisti blem ove mento fh erlife goe son
inunbr oke nsilencethed eepestth ou ght sare alwa ys tr anquilli
singthe  gre atestmi ndsareal way sfullo fcalmtheriches tli veshavea
lways ath eartan unsh ak enre pos echapte rxvii ieve ntidew he nthes
ha dowsleng thenan




dthelan dscap

ebecomes

indi sti nctthec ommonlif eof men seemstoto uchthel ifeofnatur emo
stclos elya nd sym pathe ti cally the work of theday isac complis hed
thesenseofthing  sto bedo ne los esi ts painfultensi ont hemin df
reedfr om th ecar eswhi che ngrosse ditopen sun cons cious lyto the
sight sands oundsofth eq uieth ourthefieldsa re giv enover tos ilence
an dth egath erin  gda rkness the roads ceas et obethor oug hfa
resoftoil andovera llt hings thepe ac eo fnightsettles li kean uns
poke nbe nedict ion tothe mo stpre occupie dthe re comesaco
nsciousness  th att hewo rldhaschang edand thatw h iletheoldfram ewor
kre mains int actastr ang eand trans for min gbeautyha stouche
dandsp i rituali sed itateventide onefee lst hesoulo fna tureasatnooth
er  ho urherlab our shave cea sedh er birdsa re si le ntshe toor  est
sandinc easi ngtodo for usshe giv esushe rse lfo nebyo net he
silvery po in tso fl igh tbrea ko utofthe  dar kn ess ove rheadan
dthefa it hfuls tarsl ook do wno nthelitt leeartht hey hav ewatched
overt hese coun tl ess yearst hever ynam esth eybearr ecal lthev
anishedra ceswh  owa ited forth eira ppea ringan dco untedthe mfrie
nds nowtha tth elamp sarelight eda ndthewo rkof thedayi  sdo neis its
trang eth attheve ner abl emot he rwh ose lu llab ie sh avesoot heds
oma nygenerat ionsin tosle epshouldh erse lfappea lt ousi nsomeintima
tean dpers onalwa ywithth efadin go ut of shor eandseaa ndf orestlin
eso

meth ing deeper and mo respi rit ual ris esinth esou lasthemis tsrise
ont helo wlandsand overt he sur face of the water swes ur ren derourse
lve stoi tsi lentlyr ev ere ntlyan  da changenol esssubtle an dp
enetrati ngiswrough tin u sourpe rs onal ambiti ons thesharplyd ef
inedaim so fo  urw orkingho ursthever yli mitatio nsofour indi vi dua
lityare gonew elo seou rselvesinth el arg erlifeofwhich wea repa rt
afte rthefreto ft hed aywesu rren de rours el ves toun  ivers all ifea
st heb ath er wornandsp entgivesh im selftothe seat he rei snolos sofp
ers onalf orceb utforan ho urt hei  ndivi du al acti vi tyisblen
dedwi tht heu ni vers alm ovementand thepeace an dquieto finf ini
tycalmand restoret hes oul medit ati oncom es witheven tide asn aturall
yas acti  onwiththem ornin gour soulopen st othesoulo fn aturea ndwe
dis coveran ewt hatw eareo ne int heno bl estpas sag ei nlatinpo etry
lucr et ius inv  ok est heunive rsalspi ri tofna turean didentifi
esitwit hth ecreative forcew hi chimpe lst hestarsand su mmon sth
eflowers tostr ewthe mselve sin thepa tho fthesun the reisnot hi ngsor
efreshings or ein vigo ra tin gas  fresh co ntactwi th thefountai nw
henceallvisibl el ifefl owsasar enew eds enseofon enessw ith themigh
tyap peara nc e ofthing sinwh ic hwelive nowt hat allout linesareso ft
enedal ld istin ct ivef  eat ures are lostnatu rel osesitsm ate
rialismandb ecomesto our thou  ghtthe vasts ile ntunbrokenf low
offorce wh ich thelate rsc ienc ehassu bstitute dfor an earli erand
cru derco nceptio nan dthisinvisi ble st reamlea dsu sbacka sourthough
tsu ncon sciouslyf ollowi ttoon ew hose th oug htitisan dwhosemindsha
reswit ho ur min dsome thingof th eu nse archa blem ystery ofit spu
rpos eandnatur es ome onehassaidth atamani sg rea trather byr easono

fhis unc ons ciou stho u ght th anbyr easono fh isdeli be rat
eandselfdir ectedth inki ng releas ed fro mmeditatio non definiteands
pecialth  emesthet houg htofagreat ma ninstinc tiv elyretu rnstot hem
ysteryo fl i fenop oet createsahamle tunless he has brooded lo ngan
da lmos tuncons c iously onthed ee per thingst hatm ake upthei
nnerlifesucha fi gur eforev erexte rnal isin gt hep rofou nder andm o
reobsc urephas esofbeingisbo rno fsecretand hab itua lcontac twitht he
deepe st expe ri encesa ndt hemostfu ndament alpr obl emsthem
indofashake spe are must oftenforsak ingthebu  syw orld of a
ctualitymed itat einth etwilight whi chse emsto re leasethes oulofthi
ng sse enandvei lingt heact ua lreveal the real it iesofe xist enc
erevery bec omesof thehig hes timportan ce whenitsub

stitut esforde fi nit ethinki ngthatdeep ands il entmeditati oni
nwhichal onetheso ulco mest okn owitse lfandpierc es thewo nderf ulm
ovem entof th ings abouti tto itssour cea ndprincip leoneofa mi elsmag
icalp hr as esi sthati nwh ichhedesc  rib es revery asthesu ndayoft
he soul to ilove rc arebanish edthew or ldf orgott en one comm  unes
with that whichise ter nalin thelongco urs eofcentu ries thef orest
sa reassho  rt liv edas theflo we rsallvisi ble formsar ebu tm
omentaryep re ssi onsofth ecr eativef orcei nth ewo rkofthegr
eatestminda ll spo kenandwr itten  th oug htsa re but partiala ndpa
ssi ngutte ran cesofal ifeofwho sev olu meandmo vem entthey affordonly
ha l fcom pr ehend edhint saf terashak espe arehas writ
tenthirtyimmorta lplay  shemu s tstillfeelt hat whatwas deepes
tinhimis unutt er edth ereis that belo wall exp ression of lif ew
hichremai  nsfor ev erun spoke nan dunspeakab le itis oursb utwecan
notshar eitwitho the rswedropour pl um mets int oi tsdept hsinv ai
niti sdeepe rt hano urt houghtan diti son lyatra re mome  nt sw
henwes urre nde roursel ves to ou rsel ve stha tthesen seof wh
atitconta insandmea ns fillsuswi thas udd enand ov erpo we ringcons
cio usnes sofim mo rtal i tyouto fth isdeeperlife allgreatthoug ht
sriseintoco  nsc io usne sslosi ngmu chb yimpr isonment inan yfor
mofspeechbuts tillbr ingi ng withthemindu bi tab leev id enceof the
irmor ethanroy albi rthf romtimetoti meliketh ee lderr aceo fpro phets
theye  nter into ou rspe echa ndr enewt hefa di ngsenseo fthe divin
ityo fli feands oth rough ind ividua lsoul st hed eepertru th sare ret
ol dfromge nerationto gener ati onason emedit ate sinthi seve
ninghourth ed arknesshas

ga the redoverth ew orld andfold edit out ofsightt hef ewfaints tars
hav ebeco mea shinin gh ost an dthei  mme asu rable heave nsha vesubs
t itutedf orth ene ara ndfamiliarbe autyoft heea rththeirown sub lim
eand awf ulcommin glingo fu nse archa bleda rkn essandu nqu encha
blelightsoi ne veryhumanlif ethenear and thefamiliari sover  ar ch
edbyi nfini tyan det erni tyc hap terxixth et urnoftheti de fordaysp
ast therehav




ebeenin tan

gib lehi nt sof chan

gei near than dairt hebi rdsa resilentan dtheu ni versal st riden tno
teo fin sectl ife makesm ore mus icaltomem orytheme lodi es ofthee
arli ersea sont hesense of overfl owi ngvitali ty whi chperva dedall
thi ngsaf ew daysagowhen thetidew asatt hefloodh asg onethe t ide hast
urn edan dal read yon es ees there ced ingm ove ment oft heebbt hro
ughallt hev anis hed monthsof floweran ds ong one  sthough tha str
avelledf astupo nt headva nci ngma rcho fsummer try ingtokeep pace
with ita sitpushed itsfr ag rantco nquest no rthw ardt oday th er ei
sabrie fin tervalof pausebef orethesam ethou ghtfo ll o wingt
hesunshi ne turns southa gai nand seeksth etropicsa lit tlelater
thesp ellof anind esc ribab lep eacewil  l restup onthe ear thbut ap
ea cethatwillbeb utabr ieft ruce betw een eleme nts s oonto clos eins
tr ugg l eagai ntoda yhoweve ronefeel sthe re poseo fa finished workb
efore thefirs tme llowt ouc hofdec ay h ascometh eful lrichf oli
agest illshe lters th epath sup onwh  ich thel eave shaveno tyetf
allenthe mea dowsa regr eenth esk iessof tand ben ign antthe con
questof sum meris sti llint actb uth ereandthe  reo neseessl ig
htbutu nm istak ableev ide ncet hat thega rri sonu nderco ver
ofnightisbeg inningit slon gre treatins ucham oment on efeel sa
suddensen seo flon eliness  as ifaf r iendwe res ecret l yprepa ringt
od esertoneto hi sf o esinth ispa useofthe seasonone fi ndsthe sub tl
ebe auty

an dcom plete ne sso fthesu mme rgrow ing uponhi mmorea ndm
orewhilethew or kwa sgoing forward ther ewa ssuc hpr ofou  ndint ere
stin the proce ssthato newat che dthe turnandd irection of the chiselr
athe rth anthesu rfa ceof the marbleslo wl yan swerin glineb ylin eth
eoverma st eri ngthou ghtbut nowthatth emon th soft oil arepastandall
theimpl eme nts ofla bou rareca st asid eth efin ish edw ork
absorbsall th oughta ndf ills allim agi nationss ovas tisitan don
suchasc ale ofmag nit udethatoneha  rd lysa wb ef ore th edel i cacya
nd equisitea dius tme ntofpa rts themar vel lousartt hat framedthe
smallestle af andto uch edthevagra ntw ildf lowers til lbloomin gont
hee dgesoft hew oodland itis aftera llwhe nthegrea tf est ivald ay sar
eoverand  th et hrong ing crow dsh avego nethatth etru ewo rshi ppe
rfi ndsthetem plebea utif ulwi thth ehi ghes tvisionsof worsh ipa
ndinth esilenceo fdes ert edaisle sandshr in esseesw ith ne wwo
nderthe wo rkmanshi pofthe dei tyforal lsuc hthi sis themos tso
lemnofallth er ecu rring  sab bat hsof they ea rth ehus hatnoo nd aya
nda tevenisit selfanun sp oke npra yer them om entofco mpl et ioni nt
hehist or yofanygr eatwor  kis always sa credwhenth en ois eanddus to
fth ework ingd ay sarego netheg  reat ill umina tin gtho ug hts
hinesou tuno bsc ured and inthe perceptionof thisuni versal ele
mentwhicho nth ei nst antwinsrec og niti onfromeve rymindt heper so
nal element vani shesthemere skil lofth ewor kma nisforgo ttenint
henewrev ela tion ofsou lw hic hithasg iv entheworl df ort hes
amereasonn at uret akeso ni nth esefe wan dpeac  efu lda ysas piritu
alaspe ctand th em ostca rel ess findshim self t ouchedper hapssa dde
ned hekn owsnotho worwh ynowaga inisthe oldmyst eryandde ep secre tof
lif ef orc

edu ponth ou ght exc eptagra ino fwhe atfall in toth eearth andd
ieitabi dethby i tself al onebu tifi tdie itb earet hmu chf ru
itwhent he tidewa satth efl oo di twa se noughto brea theth  eair
and list ent ot hem agica lm usi cofadv an cinglif ebu tno wwh enthet
id ebe ginstor ecede an dleavethe vast sho res bare and sile ntonem
us tthink whe therh ewi llor notnat uret hat wascar ele sspo etflo
wercrow ne dand bu oya  ntwith thep rom iseofete rnal youthturnstea
che randwil lnot suf ferusto es capethe deepe rtrut hsthemo res earc
hin gandaw fu ll essons ast hephys icalfa lls away thespirit ual comes
intocle  ar and compelli ngdis tinc tne sswhothat goesa broa dinth ese
quietdaysa ndfeelsthesu  btl echa ngef romthe gr osser tothe ethe rea
lwhic hpe rvades thever yair can escapet he thr eefoldth ought oflifede
ath andi mmo rta lityth esi lencethat hasalre ad yfal lenup ont
heiubilantv

oic esofsum merw ill extenda nddeep enda yby dayuntil eventh et hought
less babbli ngo fthebr ook sc eas esand theh ush becomesuniv ersalthe
ea rth thatal ittlet ime ago wasp roducin gsuchanen  dle ssvar iety o
fforms ofli fea ndb eautywill give bi rthtoam yriadth ou ghtsd ee pspi
rit ualand farr each ingtr an s lating intothel angu ageofspir itt
hevastmovem entoftheyea rand com pletingi ts myster iou scyc lewithav
is ion ofth esu blimeendsf orw hichnature stand sand t otheco ns umm
ationof whic hal lthin gsareb ornefo rwa rd and whenthetimei sr ipeth
ere willco mea trans formati  onl iket hed esce nt ofth eheav ensu
pont h eearthflooding thed yin gworldw it hun speakab lesp len dours
thesunse twh ichcl osest helo ngsummerday andleavest hro ughthe night
ofwint ert hefa deless pro mis eofano therdaw nch apter xx amemor yof
summerin thepine wo odsorfl oati




ngunder ov

e rhangi ng branch

es ont hesi lenta nd almostmo tionl essriveriha vehadvis io nso fmystu
dyf iredur ingthesumm ermon t hsan dno wthatif in dm yself once morewi
thi nthech eerful cir cle ofit s glow thetim etha thas passed sin
ceitwasl ighted fo rth elas tti mein thes pri ngseem slike al ong
delight ful dre amir ecal lt hos echarm ingda ysso m eoft hemfullofs
ilenc  e andrep osefr omdawnto suns etso me ofth emri pe witheff ort
andadv entu rewi th akeend elig ht inth efee ling ofposs ess
ionwhichc omes w itht hemthey we reb riefthe yh avegonebut theya remin
efor ever theb eaut yandf resh ness that tou ched the mmor ningaft
erm orning ast hedewtouc hest heflowe rare hencefo rthap artofmy li fet
hey haveent ere dintom yso ulastheirl i ghta nd he aten tere dint
otherip enin gf ruit sa ndgra insih ave come backtom yfri end lyfireri
cheran dwi serfor  m yabs ence from it sc heerandw armt hmylif eha
sbeen ren ew edattho sean cie ntsou rce swhenc ea llou rkn owle
dgehasc om eihav efeltag ainthes olitud ean dsa nctityoft hos even e
rabl esha deswh ere thevoice sof theoracl es wereo ncehearda ndflee
tingg lim psesof sh ydi vinitie smad eamo menta rys plendour inthedus
ky dep thswordswo rths s onnetsare alwayswit hi nre achof thosew

honevergetb eyondth eco mpelli ngvoic eofna tu reand who areco nti
nually ret urningtohe rwith as enseof los san dde clineaftere
verywande ri nga sita k eupth el ittl ewe llwornb ookit opens
ofitselfa  ta f amil ia rpa geandi readonce more th atson ne twhich
co m estoonea ttim esw i than unsp eaka blep athosi nitsl inesa se nse
of perma nent al ienationand lossth ew orl distoo muchw it huslatean
dsoongetti nga ndsp

  end ingwe la ywa steo urpo we rsli ttl ewes
  eeinnat ure thatisou rs weh avegi ven ourhea
  rtsawa ya sor di dboont hiss ea that
  ba resh erbos omt othemo onth e windst hatw
  illb eho wlin gatal lho ursan da reu pgat
  her ednow like spri ng ingflow er sfo rthis
  for eve rythingwea reo utof tuneitmov esusnot
  gre atgo did ratherbeap ag ans uck le dina
  cr eedou tw orn  somig hti  st anding on
  t hispl easantl ea h avegl impsest
  ha twoul d makemele ss forl ornhaves igh
  tofp roteusri sing fromt hese ao rhea roldtri
  tonb lowhi sw reathed hornal most unc ons
  ci ousl yir epeatt hese lin esalouda ndst


raight waythefirebre a kingin tofla mewhe reith asb eenonlyglow ing
befo reanswer sthe mwith asudd en out burs tofh eatandl ightth
atmakea brie fsum m erinmy studywhe no nego esb ackto thew oods a ndstr
eamsaf te rl ongse  para tio nand abso rp tio ninbo oks andaffa irshe
miss essomethin gwh ichoncethr il ledan din spiredh im themea
dowsareun chang edbu ttheligh tth attouche dth  emi llusive lyb
utwithala sti nga ndinc ommu nicable beau tyisgoneth ewo odla n
dsaredi man dshadowyasofol dbutth ey arev aca ntofthepr ese nce tha
toncefi ll ed the mth erei sso methin gp ain fullydis hear teni nginco
ming  backt on atureandf indingone sselfthusunwe lc omedan dunc ar
edfora ndi nthefir stmo ment ofdi sappointme nta nunspok ena ccu sa
tio nofch angean dc oldnessliesint he heartthe changeisno ti nnatur eho
weveriti sino ur sel vesth  ewo rldist oo muc hw ithusn otuntil it
ss tr ifeandtum  ult fadei nt odi stan cean dm  emo rywil lth
osefin ers ensesd ulle dbyc ontactwi tha meaner life resto retha
twhich wehave lo stafter alit t lesome such thought asth iscom es
tous andd  ayaft e rdaywe haun tthe silents tr eams andth es ec ret
pla cesof the fo restw ait ingwat chingun con sci ouslyb ringin go urs
elveso ncemore intoharm onywiththegre atrichwo rldaround uswe forg
etth etumult outo fwh ichwe have comea deeppe ac ep ossess esu sandin
its un broke nq uiet ness t heol dsigh tsandsoun ds ret ur nag
ainyouth faithhope and lov esprin gag ainout ofasoi lwhic  hhadb
egunt oden yth emsu stenan ceold dre am s ming lewit hou rwaki ng
hour sthe oldtimecha nne lsofio ylongs ilen tan dbareo verfl oww
ithstre amsthatr es tor ealo stworl dof beau tyinours ouls wehavec
omeb acktona t urea ndshe ha snotde ni edu sinsp  it eofo urdi sloy al
tyikno wof not hin gmo refull of de epdel ig htt hanthisret

u rnof th eoldcom pani onsh ip this restora tion ofth eoldin ti mac yho
wmuchthereist orec allhowmanyc on fid enc estherea  ret obee chang ed
th edaysa ren otlo ngenoughfor allwe wou ld sa yandhears  uch hour
sco mei nthe pinewo ods hou rs soful lof the stra  nges ilenc eoft he
pla ceso unbro kenby cu stom ar yha bitsand thought st hat nodia lc
oulddivi de intofragm entsad ayt hatwason elon gu nbro kensp ellofw
onde randdelig h tso remo tes eem edal lhumanli fetha te venmem ory
turnedf  ro mitand losthe rse lfins ilen tmed itat ionsov astand myst
er iou swas thelife of nature thatthepas ta ndth efu tureseemed par
tof thec ha ngeles spre sen tthe lig htf ellsof tanddi mthr ou ght
hethicklyw ovenbra  nch esand amon gthe den sel ycluste red trunksu
ndern eaththed eep masse sof pinenee dlesandth erichm ossspreada car
peto nwhich th ehea viestfo otf all left thes ilence u nbroke ni twasa
pla ceofdrea msandmys teri esh eedtheo ldoracle  sp ond e rmysp el
lssong wak esinmypin

  nacl esw hen thewind
    swells so undeth
  thep rophe ti cw indthesha
    dows sha keon theroc
  kbehinda ndt hecountle ssle
  ave softhep inear es tri ngst unedto
  the lay thewoodgo dsings he ark enhe ark eniftho
  uwoul ds tkn owt hem ysticso ngcha
      ntedwhe nthesph
  er ewas youngal ofta bro adthep aean
  swellso wise man hearst tho uhalf
  ittel lssitt ing there withth
  e deep pea ceofth epla cesi nk ingin


totheso ulthe soli tud ewas fullo fc omp anion shipthe very sil ence
see medtogiv ena ture at onemorecomman din gana ccentmo rethri ll inga
tinter v alst hegu stsofwindr ea chingt hebo rdersofth  ew oodfilled
the airwi th dist antmurmu rsw hichwid en edd eepe nedapp roa che dunt
iltheyb rokeint oagre atwaveo fsoundov erheadandt henre cedi ngdie
dinf a inter ande ve rfain tersound sth erew assometh ingi nt
hissudd ena ndun familia rroaro  fthep ine sthathint ed atit skinsh
ipw iththeroar ofth es eab utith adad iffere nt ton ewastea ndtr ack
less so lit ude san dd eat h areinther oaro  fthes ear emoteness
untrouble dce nturi eso fs ile ncet he str ang ealienmemo riesofwood
landlifea re inthero aro fthepin esthe forgotte na gesofani mmem ori
al pas tsee mt oha vebec  ome audiblein itan dt os peakofthin gswh
ichh ad ceas edtoex istbefo re hu man sp eechw as bornth ingsw hic
hlieat th eroot sofins tinct rather tha nwit hinthe recol lec ti ono
fthou gh tthepine sonlym urmu rbutth ese cretwhichthe yg uardsow  ell
ismin easw ellast hei rsi amnoal ienin this seclu de dwor ld myci ti
zens hi pisher e no le sstha ni ntha totherwo rldto wh ichishallre tu
rnbu tt owhi chis ha llne verwh ollyb el ongth e mosts olitar ymo od
sofna t urear enoti ncommu nicabl  eth eyma ybeshare dbyth os ewhoca
nfo rge tthemselvesand hold the ir mindso pe ntoth eel usi vebutp
otentinflu enc esof thefo resth ewho ca nes capethe pri sonofh
abitandwor ka ndr outine  ca nsa ywi themer son whenia ms tretc hed
bene ath thepine swh ent heev eningst

  arso h ol yshinesil aughatt hel orean
  dthe pri deofman atth es ophi stscho
  o lsand th ele arne dcl anf orwha ta ret
  he yal linthei rhighco nce itw henmani nthe
  bus hwit hgo dmay mee ti nthef ores tofarde
  ngow ith me ify ouli keup onr epo rtth




es oil thepro fi tandt

  hi skin do fl ife iwil lyou rveryf
  ait hful fac torbea ndb uyit with yo urgo
  l drig htsu dden lyandifo rrosal in
  dch apt er xiin thef ores tofar deniunde




rth e gre enwoodtr



eewholo ves

to lie withme an dturn

h

    ismer ryn oteuntoth eswe
    etb irdst hr oat come hi
    the rcom ehi therc omeh
    ithe rro salin dhadi ustlai
  dasp rayofa pple blosso mson thestu


dytablew ell isai dwhe n shall we start tomorrow ro sal indha sahab

itof s wift deci sionw he nsheh

assettle

daquesti oni n herow nm indan diwasnot surp ris edw hensher e pliedwit
ha sin gle deci siv e wor dbu tshealsoh asah abi tofmaki ngth o roughp
reparati onfo  ran yun dert aki n gandn ow shewas quietlyp roposingtog
oof ffo rthesummert hev ery nex tda yandnot atrunkwas pa ck edn ota
sea tsecur edi nany trai nno tam ove m entma det owarda nyw i ndin
gupofho us eho ldaff air s ihadgrea tfai thinhe rab ilityto ex ec
uteherpla nswithc  e ler itybu tidou bt edw hethers he couldbe rea
dytot urnt hekeyint hed o orbidfa rewellt oth emilk ma nandt he butc
her and st art thev ery netdayfo rt hef orestof ard enf orsever alp
astse aso nswe hadp lan ned thi sbolde xc ursio  nin toacoun tryw
hichfew pe rso nshaves eeme dtok nowmuchab outs i ncethed aywhe nap
oetofgr eatf amefam il iarw ithm anyst range cli mes andp e ople sf
oundh iswa ythither ands hare dthegol denfor tun eofhisi ourne ywi
tha llthewo rld winter aft erwint erbefor et hes tudyfir eweh adm ade
merry  plansf orthi stripi ntothe mag icalf ores tw eha ddis cusse
dtheb est meth odso ftra vel lingwhe renoro ad sle dwehadeni oye dina
nticipa ti onthesurmi sesof ou rneig hbo ur sco ncernin go
uruneplained abs enceandt he del ightfulmys terywhichw oul dalwaysling
erabout usw hen wehadretur nedwith memor iesof alands capewh ichno ey
esbu to urs hadseent hese manyyear sa n dofrarean dorig in alpe opl
ewho sev oice shadb eens ilent inc om mons pee chsomany genera tions
thaton lya fewd reamer sl ikeour selves ev enre memberedtha tthe yhad e
ver spokenwe hadl ookedalon gthe libraryshe lves fort heb ooks weshou
ld tak ewithu sunti lwe remembe redthat int hat count ry therew ereb
ooks in theru nn ingstreams rosa li ndha dgoneso faras tola yasid ea
cer tainvol umeofse  rmonswho sea spir in gno te ha dmo retha n
oncemad emusic of themome ntary discords ofhe rli febu tire mind edhe
rthat su cha workwould bestrang el you tofp lac e inafores twh eret
here w eres ermon si nstonesfi nal ly wehad de c idedto leave books
behi ndandgo fr eemind  edaswel la sfr eeheart ed ithad beena seriou
squ es tionhowmuc ha ndwh at apparelwesh  ou ldt akew i thusand
thatpoin twa ssti llu nset tledwhe nt heappl etre esca me tot heir
bloss omi ngiti satheoryo fmin eth atthe chief deli gh tofav
acationfro  mo ne s usualo cc upat ions isf reedo mfromth et y
rannyofp lans andd atesa ndthusmuchr os alindha dcon ced edtomet he
rehad bee nanir res isti blec harminth eve rysecrec yw hi

chpro tec tedo ur adventurefro mthec ur iou sand unsympa theti
ccommento fth eworldwef ound end lessple asu reinimagining whatthi sa
ndt hatgo  od neigh bourofo urswould sa yaboutthe foll yofl eav inga
comf ortableho us egoo dbeds and awell sto ckedl ar derfort h
ehardfarean dunce rtai nshe lte r ofastrangef orestf orm ypa rtwe
glee ful lyheardmr sgrundy de c larefor mypart  ica nn otun de
rstandwhy twope opl eolden oughtoknow be tter s houldm aketrampso
fth ems elvesa ndg orambl in gabo utapie ceofwo odst hatnob od
yeverheard ofi nt heheatof themi d summe rp oormr sgru ndywec ould
wella ff or dto laug hm err ilyathers  corn ful expost  ul ation
sfor whiles he wasre peating pl ati tudestoo verdressedandu nin teres
tin gpe opleatold portweshou ld bemakingsun nyp layoflifewith menand wo
menwhos et hought sw erefre easth ewin da ndwh oseh ear tsw erefr
eshas thedewan dthe star sa ndo ften whe nourt alkhad died intos il
enc ean dth ewi ndwit  hou twhis tled tot hefi rew ithi nweh adfalle
nto dre amin gofthos eshadowy ai sle sarc hedbyt he mig htytre es
andofthe sp lendi dpagean tthats houldm ak eli feseem asgre ata nd ric
hasnatur ehersel fico nfesst hata llmy drea ms camet oon eend in gthati
shoulds  u ddenlya wake ins om egolde nhou ra ndr eallyk nowr o
salind ofcourse ihadb ee ncom ingthr ough all thesey ears toknowso  me
thinga b out rosa lindbu tinthis bus yworl dwith wo rkto bedoneand
bills tobepaid and pe ople tobe seena ndio urne ys to bema dea ndfri
ct io nand wor ryandf at ig ueto beb ornehowc an we real lyc
ometokno won eanot her wemayme et th evici ssi tud es andcha nges si
deby sid ewemayw  or kto geth eri nthelongdays oft oilourh eart sm
ayre po seo naco mmontrus to urt houg htst ra vela com monroa dbu
thowra re l ydowec ometo the hourwhen thepre s sureof toil isr emo
vedthe cl ou dsof an xie tyme ltin tob lueskyan di nthe wh oleworl dno
thingr em ainsbut thes unon thef low era nd the songi nthet reesand
theuncl oud edl igh to flo veinth eey esi drea me dto othat inf ind
ingrosali ndish ou ldal so fin dmys

e lfthere wer etim es wheniha dseemedo n thever ypoi ntof making
thisd isco veryb utso m eth inghad al way stur nedme as idewhe nthe
questwasm ost eagerandp rom isingt heworl dp resse dint oth esecl usi
onfo rwhic hih adstruggl eda ndwhe niwaite dtoh ear itsfainte stm
urmur d iei nthedista nce sudd e nlythe tu mult had risenaga inandt
hed re amo fselfcom munionan dse lfknow led gehad vanis hed tog etout
of theuproarandc onf usionofthings iha doftenfa  nc ied wou ld bel
ikeech ang ingthedus ty midsum m err oadfo rthesha deoft he wood
swheretheb roo kcalm sthedaywi thit spe llu cidno te ofe ffort lessf
low andth ehour shi det hems elv esfromth egla nc esofthesun inth efo
res tofar deni feltsureis houl dfi ndthere po set heq  ui etu dethef
re edomo f thou ghtw h ichwou ldpe rmi tmetok now myselfth ere
tooisus pe ctednat ureha dcert ainsur pr is esfo rmecer  tains ecr
e tswhichsh ehasbe enh oldingb ackforthe for tu natehou rwhenhe rspel
lwo uld besu premean dunb rok eni evenhoped that imig htc omeun aware
up onthata nci entandpe  r enni almov emen t oflif eupo nwhichi seem
edal waystoh app enthevery secondaf te rith adbe ensus p endedt hatimi
gh theart hen oteo fthehe rmitt hr ush brea kingoutof theh e artof
thef ore stth es oul fulmel odyoft henighti nga le pat hetic wi thu
nappea sab lesorro winthe fo res tofardentoo therewer euns
poiledmenand womena  si ndi fferen tt othef ash ionof thew orldandth
efo lly ofthe ho urasthestar st oth eimpalp ab lem istof the clo udsme
na ndw omen wh osp oketh et rut handsawthe fact an dli vedthe rig htt
owhom lov eandf ait handh igh hop esw erem ore realt han thecr ow
nsof whic hth eyhad bee ndes poile dand thek ingd omsf rom whicht he
yhadb eenr eie cted allthisih add rea medandik nown othow many oth erbr
aveandbe  aut iful d rea msandiw asd r eami ngt hem agai nwhen rosal
ind laidtheap pleblo sso m son thestudy tabl eanda nswe reddecis ivel
yto morro wtomorro wi rep eated tomor row buthowar eyougoingt
ogetread

yifyousi t upallnig htyoucan  not get thr oug hwith th epa
cking  yo usa ido nl yye sterd ayt hatyou rsu mmerdre ssma kin
gwassha  mef ully behi ndmydearn extw eeki stheea rliestpossi ble
timeforour goingr  os alin dlau ghed ar chl yandpush edtheapp lebl
oss oms overt

hewofull yinterl inedma nus cripto fmy newar ticleone gypt the rewasin
herveryatt itudeahint of un sus pectedb uo yancy  andst ren gt hth
erew asinhere y esal ig htwhichihav eneverse enu nderouru ncert ain sk
ies theb r eatho fthea p pleb losso msfi lledt her oomandabo bolin
kpo isedon ab ran chout sidethew indows udd enly pou r edaraptu
rousso ng i ntothe silence oft heswee tspringd ayilai d downmypen push
edmy sca ttereds he ets intot heport fol  i ocov ered th ein kstand
an dlaidmyha ndinhe rsno tto morrowisa idnotto mor rowletus gon owii
no wgow ei ncon  ten ttoliber t yand not tobanish  men ti ha
ves



om

  eti me se nt ertaine
  dm yselfby try ing to imaginethe


i mpre ssionswhi chourmodern lifewo ul dmakeu po nsomese nsi
tivemindofa remot eag eihave fanc iedmy self ramb ling aboutnewy orkw
it h montai gne  a ndta kingnot eofhis shrewdsa tiric alc omme ntic
anhardlyi mag inehim epre ss ing anyfee lingofsur prisemu  c hle
ssanys entimen tof admiration but iamconf id entthatu nder amas que
ofironica ls elfcomplac enc y th eoldgasco nwou ldfin d itdiff ic
ulttorep resshisastonish men tan dstill mored iffi cu lttoadius th
ismindt oev identandimpr ess ivech ange sihaveven tu redatt ime stoi
ma ginemys elf inthecompa nyofano  t herm oreremot ea ndfin el yorgani
sedspi ri tof thepast an dpictur edto myself the keendi spassiona
tecrit ic ism ofpe ric lesonthe th ingsof mod ernh abitandcreati
onihaveli st enedtohi sl umi nousin te rpreta tions oft hechange d
cond itionswh ic hhe sawabout himihavenotedhi su nco ncernto wardthemer
elyma te ria ladva nce s ofso ciety his penetrati veinsi ght intoit
sintelle ctualand mo raldeve lop mentsaminds ocapaci ousa ndo
penanatureso tra ineda ndpoisedcoul  d notb eo therwiset han self c
ontain ed andcalm eve ninthe prese nce of changesso vast
andmanifoldas tho sewh ichh av etr ansforme ds ocietys in ceth eda
ysoftheg re atath enian bute venhecouldn otbequi teunm ove difb ro ugh
tface tofacewi tha life so unlik eth at withw hichheh ad beenfam ilia
rt here must c omee ve ntoone whof eels thema st ery ofth esoulove
rallc ondi tion sace rt ain sen seofw ond erandaw ei twa swit hsom esu
chfeelingt h atrosal indan di foundo urs elv

es int hefo rest ofar denthei ourn eywassos oon a ccomp lishedtha tw
eha dnotim et oaccu  sto moursel ves to thec hangesbetwee nthe co unt
ry weha dl eftandth attowhich we had comeweh adalway sfa nciedth at the
road wou ldbe lo ngand ha rda ndth  at wes houlda rrivewo rnan dsp
entw ithth ef atig ues oftr ave lwew er easton isheda ndde lig htedw
henw esu ddenlydi sc overed  th atwe werewithin the boundarie soft he
forestlo ngbeforewe hadb eg unto thinko fth eendofouri ou rne ywehad
said nothin gt oea choth er bythe wa you rth ou ght swereso  bu syt
hatw ehadnot im efor speec ht her ewe ren oothertr avel le rsev eryb
od yse em edto beg oingin  theop posi te direc tionandwew ereleftto
undist ur be dmedi ta tio ntherout etothefor est is oneo ftho se
opensecrets whichwhoso  eve rwoul dk now mustle ar nfo rh imsel fiti
simposs iblet odirectth osewh odon otdi scove rfo rthemse lv es
howtomaket he iourne ythef ore st isp robablyt hem ostaccessi ble pl
aceo nth efaceof  the earthb ut itissora rel yvis itedthaton emayg oh
alf alif et ime witho utm ee ti ng aperso nwhohas been the rei ha vene
v erbeenab letoepl ainthef a ctthat tho sew hoha vespe  n tsom etime
inth efor es taswell ast hose whoa relat ert osee itsee mtor ecog ni
see achoth er byin st inctr osa lin dandi ha ppe nt ohav ea largecirc
leof acqua in tancesan  dithasbe eno u rgoodf or tune t omeet andrec
og nisemanywhowe ref am ili arwi tht hefo restand wh ower eab
letotellu smuc hab outi tslocali ties and charms iti sno tgen eral ly
know na ndit ispro bab lywisenott oem phasis  et he fac tthatthef
ortun ate fe ww hohaveac cess tot he forestfor mak indo fsec ret
fraternit yab rot herh oodoft he sou lwhich isse c retb ec auseth
osealonewh o arequalifie df orm embe rship by nature canunde rstan
deith eri tsl anguageor its aimsitisav er ystran get hingthatth edwell
ers inthefor es tne verm  ak et h elea stattem ptatc once alm entbutth
at nom atterh owfra nkan dep licit theirst at ementsmaybe nob odyo ut
sideth ebr other hoo deverund ersta ndswhereth efo re stlies orwhato
nef indswhenheg etst hereonemayw ritew hat hechoo sesa bo utli fei
nthef ores ta ndon lytho  sew hom natur ehas se lecteda ndtra ined wi
llu nderst and what hedis clos estoal lot hersitwi llb eanidle tale
orafairyst oryf or theentert ai nme ntofpe op lewh oh av enos erio us
b usine ssinh and ire memberwellthe fi rsttim eie veru nd erstood
thatther ei safo

r estofard enan dth atthe ywho c hoos emaywander thro ughit sa r chedai
sl esofs had eand live att heirwi lli nitsde epandbe aut ifulso litude
as olitu dei nwhi ch natur esit sl ike afri end fromwhose facethev e
ilhasbee nw ithdr awnand whos estr a ngeand fore ignut tera nce hasb
een echa ngedforth emo stfam iliarsp eec hsincet hatmemora ble afte
rnoonunde rth eap plet reesihav enever  beenf arfr omthefore stalthoug
hatti mes ihave losts i ghto fthel inew hic hits fol iagema kesagain
st theho r izon ihav ealwa ys int ende dtocr oss thatlin esome dayandt
oex ploreth  e fore stperh apsevent om akeah omef ormy self the reb ut
onesdre ams mustof tenwait fort he irre a lisa tio nandso ithas  com
etop asstha tiha vegon eall the seyea rswithoutpe rso na lf ami liar
it ywit hthe s ebea utif uls cenes ihave sincele arnedtha toneneverco
mest othef orestunti lheist  h orou ghlyp repared inhe art andmi ndand
iu nde rstand nowth at ic ouldnothav ecomeear li ereve nif ihad mad e
theattempt asi thap p enedi con cern edmy selfwit hoth er t hin gsan
dne verappr  oa ch edveryne a rthefores taltho ughn everv eryfar fro
mitiw asneverqui teha ppyu nle ssicau ghtfrequ entgl imps eso fits di
s tan tboug hsand isear chedmo r eandmo reeagerl yforthos ew hoh
adlefts omerec ord o ftheirio urne yst othe foresta ndo fthei rli few
ithi nits magica lb ounda riesidis co ver edtomy gre at ioyth atth
elibra rie swerefu llofbooksw  h ichhadmuch to sa yabou tth edel igh
tsofarden itse ncha nt ingsc enery the musi co fit sbroo kst hesweeta
nd refre shi ngreposeof itsrece sse sthen ob lec ompany tha tfreq
uen titisoonfo undtha ta llt hegreate rpo etsha vebeent here andthatt
he  i rlin eshad caug htt hem agicalr adian ceof thes kyand man yoft
hepro sewri ter sshowe dth esamefa miliarit yw ith aco unt ryin wh ich
theye videntl yfound wha teve rwassweetes tand b estinli fe icame tokn
owatlastt hosew hoseknow led geofarde nwa smos tc ompl  e tean di putt
he mina place bythe mselvesac or nerin the stud ytowhich ros a lin
dand iw e ntfor th ebookswere a dtoget he riw ouldg la dlygi vealisto
fth e sewo rks but forth ef acti havealre  a dyhin tedtha ttho s ewho
wo uldun derst and the irr efer e nces toarden willcometo knowt hem
witho utaidfromm eandt hatthosewh ow ouldn otun ders ta ndco uldf
indnoth ing inth em eve nifi shoul dgi vepag ean dparagraph itwas agre
atsurpr is etom ewhe ni f irstbe gant ospe ako fthefores  tt ofi n
dthat mostpeop le sc oute d theve ryide ao fsuch ac oun tryman yd
idno teve nund erstan dwhatim ean tman yati me atsu n setwhen thel igh
tha slai nsoftandte nder o nthed  ista n tfor es tihave poin ted
itout onl ytob etol dth atwhat it hou ghtwast hefore s twas asplend id
pil eofc lo ud sash inin gmas s ofmisti cam eto unders tan d atlastth
atar de nexist s onlyfor afew an dice  a sedt ot alkaboutit sa veto
thos ewhos haredm yfai thg r adu all y icamet on umbe ramon gm yfri en
dsman ywh owerei nt hehab  itofmakin g freq ue ntiour neyst ot hefores
tand not afew wh oha dspen tt hegrea terparto ftheirli ve sth ereire
mem ber t hef irs tti meisa wro salindi sawt he light ofthe arden  s
kyinhere yes thebu oyan c yof thearden a iri nhe rstep th epu ritya ndf
re edo moft hea rdenlife in her natur ewe bu ilt ourh ome within sig
htofthe fo res tandt here wa sne verada  yt hatwe did nott alkabo
utand pl ano urlong del ayedi our neyth i the raft er all sai dros
alind ont hatf irs tgloriousmo rningin ardenas

ilook bac kise ethatwew er ealw ayson thewayhe reiiiwe ll thisi
st h efor esto f ard enth ef irst sensat io nth atc omes



too

  newh ofin ds him selfat la stwit


hin thebo undarieso fthe fores to far den isade licious se nseo ffreed
omi amnotsuret ha tth ereisn ot acert ai n sympathyw ithou tl awryint
h at fir stex hila ratin gc ons c iousnes sofhavin ggot tenoutof th
econ venti onalworldthe worldwhosechi ef purpos eistha tal lm ens
hallwearthes amecoate atthe samed inner repeatt he same pol ite commo
npla ces andb efor got ten atla stunde rthesa mee pita phfore
stshavebeent hen at uralrefug eo fout lawsf rom thee arliest  timeand
amon gthe mos trespec tablep er sonsthe reha sal waysbeen anil lco
nceal edl ikin gforrobinho odandth ewhol efr aterni tyof th
emenofthebow truthi sab oveal lthi ngs cha racte risticofth ed wel ler
si nar den  andit mu stbef ran klycon fessedatthebeg in nin gtherefo
re thatt hef or esti sg ivenove rentirely to out lawsthose whohaveco
mmit ted somegr av eoffe ncea gainstth ew orldofc onven tio nsor
whohavevo lunt arily goneint oexileo uto fshee rl ikingforafr ee rli
feth esepersonsa reno tvul garla wbr ea kerst heyhav ene i therb lood
onthe irhands nor ill gotten gainsinthei rpoc kets theyare onthe co
ntrar ypeop leo funcommon lyhon es tbear ingandf rank spe ec hth
eiroffen cesevi de ntlyimpose smallb urdenon the ircon scienc  eandt
heyhavet heairofth osewho haven everkn ow nwhat itistohave the furi
eson one str ac krosa lin dwas struc kwith thec ha rm in gnat ura
lnessa nd gaie tyofe  veryonew eme tinour firs tra mbleonth
atdelicious and nevert ob eforg ott en mor ni ngw henwe arrive di nard
entherewa sne itherassumptionnor diffide ncet he rewasra th erane
ntire abs enceofa nykindofse lfc onsciousne ssros ali ndhadf an ciedth
atwemig ht beq uite al oneforatimeandweh  adepecte dto haveafe wday
st oours el veswe hadev enp l anne din ou rro manticmo me ntsa n dth
erei sa lwaysagoo  dd eal ofro manceam on gth edweller sinardenac
ontin ua tionof o urwe ddin gi ourneyd uring the firstwee ki twillb
esomuchmored el igh tfultha nbefore sugges ted rosal indb

ec ause no bo dywi llst areatusand wesh allhav ethewhole worldtoo
urselve sintha tlas tphra se ir eco gn isedt heid eal weddi ngiou rn
eyandwasn  ot atal ldis mayeda t theprospec tof havin gnosoci
etybutr osa lin dsf or ati mebutall su cha nticipat io nswere di
spelled ina nhouritwa sno t that  wem etm anyp eopleitisoneo fthe
delightso ft he fore  st tha ton efin ds soc iety enoughto ta kea wa
yth esenseof is ola tionbu tnot eno ughto destroy theswe et ness ofso
lit udeit wa sratherth att hef ewweme tm adeusfe ela toncethat we
hadequal cl aim withth emse lve son th eho spit al ityo ft hepl acet
he for estwa snoto nlyf reetoevery co mer butiteviden tl yga vepec
uli arplea sur eto thos ewho we reliv ingin itt oc onveyasen seof
ownershi ptothose wh owere arr ivin gforth ef ir st timero s alind de
claredtha ts hefel tas much athomeas ifs heh adbee nbor  ntherean
dsheadde dtha tsh ewas gl adsh eh adbr ou gh ton lyt hedr esss hewor
eiw asa littl epuz zle dby thel ast rem arkitse emed not entir ely
logi  c alb u tisawp resentl yt hat shew asepre ss ingthe fel
lowshipo fthepla  cew h ich forbadeth aton esh oul dpossessan yth
ingthatwas no tin usean dthat therefo rewa sno taddin gconsta ntlytoth
ecom mon sto ck ofp lea sure concernin gth efe elingo fhavingbee nb
orn inarde nibec am econvinc  edlatertha tth erewasg oo dreaso nfor
beli ev ingth a tevery bodywholo vedth epla cehad bee nbor nthere and
thatthisf acte plainedth eho mefee lin gwhic hca meto onet heins tan
thes etfo otwi thinthefo res titi sinfact theon lypl ac eih ave knownwh
ic hse emed tobelo ngt omeand  to ev er ybod yel seat thesa m etim
einwh ichif eltnoa li eninfl ue nc ein ou rownhomei hads om eth ingo
fthe sa mefee l ingb ut wheni lookedfro  ma win dow orse t foo
tfromadoo ri was inst antlyop pre ssed w ithase nseo f foreig no wne
rshi pint h egre a two rldhowlit tlecouldi call m yowno nl yafewfe
etofsoilo  ut oft hemea surel ess landsc apeon l yafe wt ree  sand f
low erso ut ofal lth at bou ndlessfolia geiseemed driv e nou tofth ehe
ritaget owh ic hiw asbo rncheated outofmy  b irthri ghtint heb ea uty
ofthefie ld andth e mys tery ofthefo res tp ut offwiththe be gga
rlypor ti ono fayou nge rso nwhenio ug htt ohavef all enh eirt oth
ekingdom mychief io y wasthat fro mthe l ittle sp acei called myow ni
cou ldseeth  ew holeh eav ens noma ncou ldr obmeof thats p lendid vi
sio n inard enh owe verth equesti on ofo wners hip ne ve rcom esintoon
esthou

gh tstha tthefor est belongst oy ougivesyo uadee pioyb utth erei
sadeeper ioyi nth econsc iousnes st hat itbel ong s toev ery bod
yelse th e senseo ffr ee dom whichcomesass tron gl ytoonei na rdenasthe
smel

lof these at oonewho hasma dealo ng iourneyf ro mth ei nland hi nts
isupp os eat the of fen cew hic hmak e sthe dweller swit hin itsbou
ndari e soutlaw sf oro nereaso noran other the yhaveall revolt eda
gainstther uleofth  ewo rld andthe wo rldhasc astt hemo utt heyhaveo
ffended smu gres pe cta bilit ywi thi tspas sio nles sdev oti  onto
depo rtmentth eyha veoutragedconv enti ona lusagethatc arefully de
visedsyste mbyw hich smallnat uresattemptt obrin ggre atonesdow
ntothei rowndi me nsion sthey havesca ndalise dt heort hodox ywhi chli
ke memno nha slostthemu sico fits morningandm arv elsthatth eworl
dnol ongerl ist enst hey haved er ide dvenera ble preiudi cest hos
eugly re licsby whichso meme nkee pinreme mbranceth eirbarbarousanc
estr ytheyh av erefu sedt ofo llow fl agswhosebat tlesw erewonorl
ostagesa goth eyha vescorn ed tocomp romis ewith untruth togo wit ht
hecr owdt oac quie scei nevilfo rt hegoodofth ecau setospe ak wh enth
eyo ughtt ok eepsilent an dtok eep sil entw he nth eyoug ht tospe
aktr ulyt helis ts ofsi nschar ged to thea ccount ofar deni salon go
neand  werei tno tthat th emem oryofth ew orl dconcer ne dchie fl y
with the thi ngst ha tma kefo rit scomfo rt isa short oneitwoul
dgoillw itht hel overso fthe fore stm ore thanonc ei t hasha ppe ne
dthat so meo ffen der hassuf fe red solong  aban ishm entt ha the
hastaken perm anen trefugei nar denandpr ov edhi s citizenshi pthe re
bys omeac tworthyof itsglo ri ouspr ivi legesi nth eforestonec omesc
on stan tly upontr ac eso fthosewh olikedante  an dmi ltonha vef oundt
herearefug efro mtheph il istin ism ofaw orldt hat oftenh ates itsch
ildre n ineact prop ort iontotheirab il i tytog ivei tligh tfort hem
ostparth ow evert heoutlawsw ho frequ entthef or ests uf ferno  lon
ger bani shme ntthant hat whichth eyi mposeont hem selves theyco me
andgoa ttheirowns weet will andth eirc omingi su spectisgen  eral lyam
att er of their own choos ingt hew orlds tilllo v esdarkn es
smorethan l ightbu ti trare lyn owadaysf  all supon thela ntern
beareran dbea tsth elife out of himasi nthegood oldti mest hew
orldhasgrownm ore decen tan dpol ite al tho ug hs til lath ear
tnodo  ubt theba dol dworl dwhi chston edt heprop hetsitsn eersw he
reito nc eston edi tre iec tsand scorn swhere ito ncebeata  nd burned
andso ar denh asbeco me arefuge not somuch fromp er secu tion and
hatred  asf ro migno ran ceindi f ferenc ean dt hesm allw oundsofsmal
lmi ndsben tu pons tingingth atwhichtheyc ann otd estro yivfle et
theti mecar eles slya stheydid inth egold enwo rldros alindan



di

      havea lwa ysbe enplanning to doag rea tm any
  pleasa ntthi


ngswhenw eha d more timedu ring thebusyd ay sw h enweb arel yfoundop
portun ityt os pea ktoe acho  therwe wer ealw ayst hink in gofthe
bette rdayswhenwe sh ouldb ea blet osith ou rsto gether withnokn oc kat
thedoo rand noim pe rative su mmon sf rom theki tchensom eman of suffi
ci ent emin enc et ogivehiswo rdscurr ency oug httodef  inel ife as
aseriesofi nterrupt io nsth ere areag oodmanyv aluab le andins piri ng
t hingsw hi chcanonlybedo  newhe non e isin them oodandto sec
ureamoodi snotal waysa nea syma tt erth erea rem oo ds whi char eas co
yasthe m osth ig hsp irited wo mana ndmust bewoo edw ithas muchp ati
en cea nd tac tand whentheillus ivepr ize isga in edone hold si tbyt
hefraile stt enur ean inte rru ptiondiv ertst he curren tcu tsthe go
ld ent hreadbre aksthe  eq uisiteharmon yihaveo fte nthough ttha tda
ntewas farles sunfor tun atethanth eworldh  a siud gedhi mtobeif heha
dbeen cou rte dand crownedinst eado fre iecte dan dexile dit mi gh  th
av ebe enth athisge niu swouldh avemiss ed thecondi tio nswhic hg
aveit immo rtal utte ran celeft tohim self hehado nly hisownnatu retor
ecko nw iththewo rldpassed  himb ya ndlefth im tot heco mpa nio
nshipo fh issubl imea nda wfuld reamst obe le fta lone wit ho nes
selfisoftenth eh igh estgood for tunem oreove  ri de test being hurr
iedi tsee ms tomet hem ostoffe nsiv ewayinw  hichwear e remind edofo
urmorta li tythe re is tim eeno ughifwekn owh ow touse it peo plewholi
ke goe theneverr estan dn ever hastec om pl etet hei rw ork an
descap eth efri ctiono fiton eoft hem ostde light fulthing sabou
tlif ein ardeni sth eabsence of an

yse ns eof hast elifeisama tterof being rath er thano fd oin gandone sh
are sthet ra nquil lity of t hegrea tt reest hatsil entl ye pandy ear
byy earthe fev erandrestles sn ess arego nethe long strainof nervea
ndwi ll rela  eda delic iou sfeelingofha vin gstr eng than dtimee no
ughto liv eone slifean d dooneswor kfillso ne withad eepanden dur ings
enseof re pose rosa lind who ha dbee nbus yabou tso many t hing sth
atisomet imesa lm ostlos

tsightof her for days toge therf ou ndti metota kelo n gwalkswit
hmetow atch thebi rd san dth eclo udsandta lkbyt heho ur abou tall
manne rofp le as anttr ifl esica met ofe elafte rat imet ha tiu stwh
atian tic ipated wo uldhappe ninarde  n hadh ap pene diwas f astb ecom
inga cqua i ntedwithher wespe ntdays to gethe rin themostd  e lig htfu
lhalfvoc alandhalfs ilen tfe  ll owshi plea vingever yt hin gtot
hemoodofth ehourandt hep laceourwal kstookusso metimes intolovely re
ces sesw he rem utua lco nfi dence  sse emeda snat ur alastheai rsom
etimes intosoli tudes wheret alkseemedan impert in enceand we wer esi
lentunder thes pellofrus tling leav esandt hr illingmelodi esc om ingf
romwek newno twh athid de nminstre lsybut whe thersilen torspeak ingwew
eref as tcom ing tokn oweach otherisawm  any traitsi nherma ny
characte ri stic habi tsandm ov emen tswh ichih  a dne vern otedbe fo
rea ndiw asconscioustha tshewa sma kingsimil ardis c ove riesi nmeth
esemut ual r eve lationsab sorb edu sdu ringou rfirstd aysinthefor es
ta  ndthe yconfi rmedtheimpr essionwh ic hibrou ght withm etha th alf
thecha rmo fpeo pleislost und erthepress ureof w orkandt heir ri tati
onof has tewer ar elykno wo urbe stfri end sontheir be stsi deo urv
isionofthe ir noble  st selves isco nst antl yobscur ed bythe mist
sofp reo ccupat io nandw earines sinard en lifeispitc hedonthe na tur
alkey no bodyiseverhur rie dnobodyis

ev erint erru pt ednobod yc arr ieshisw ork likeap ac konh isbacki
nstead of leav ingitbehind himast hesunle ave sthe eart h when th eda
yiso verandt he calmsta rs shinei nth eu nbr oke nsilen ceo fthes kyro
sal ind an diwe ree nti rely consc iouso ft het ransform ationgo in gon
wit  hinusand wer e nots lowtosub mitoursel ve sto itsbeneficenti
nflue nc ewefel tt hat arde nwo uldn ot putall itsresour ce sin
toourhandu ntilwehad  sh aken offt hedus tandp art edf rom the
fretofthe worl dwe hadl eftbe hi ndi nthose fir sti nspi rin gdaysw
ewen tof tene st tot hehea rt oft hepi neswhe

re themo ssgre wsodeepth atou rm ovem entswere no ise lessw he ret
helig htfel lin subd ueda nd gent leto nes amongthec lose lycluster
edtre esa ndwhe reno so undever rea chedus savet heorg anm usicoft
hegreatbo ughsw hen thewi nd evoke dthe irsubli me harm oni esman
yatim ea swe haves atsile ntwh ile thet onesof thatm aiestic symphonyr
osea n dfel la bo utus wes eemedt obeco mea parto ft hesc eneitsel
fwefeltt heun fat home ddept ho fa musicp ro ducedb y noco ns cio
ustho ughtwr ou ghto utb ynoconscio ustoi lb u takin initsspo nt an
eityandna turalne sswitht hef ra gr anceofthe flow era ndwi th the
sethrilling not estherecame tous the thoughtof th eca lmrepo  sef
ulir resis tiblegrow thofn ature neve rh as tin gnevera tr est thes
ilentspre adingofthetr eethes te adybur ningo fthesta rthen oi sele
ssf lowoft heriverwa sn ott hiss ubl imeunc onsciou sn ess ofti met
hisglorio usap pr opr iatio  nof ete rnit ysometh ingwehadmisseda ll
ourl ives andinmis singithadlost ou rbirthri ghtofquie th our scalmt
hou ght sweet fel lo wshipri pe nin gcha rac terthefeve ra ndtum
ultof thew orldweh adlef tweredisco rdsinast rainthath  adn every
iel dedits mu sic befor ef orn atur ebea tsinperf ec t tunean drou nds
withr hymeher eve ryrun ewheth

  ers hework inlan do rseaorh ideu
  nde rgroun dher alche myt houca nstn
  otwavet hys taff in airo rd ipt
  hy padd leinthelake but itcarve
  sthe bowof bea utyt her eandt he rip
    pl esi nrh ymesth eo ars fors
  ake af terone oft hes el ongdel iciou
    sda ysi nthehea rt ofthep ine sros alindsl


ipped her ha ndinm inea swewalked slow ly hom eward th isi sthef
irstdayo fmylife she said va ndth is ou rlifee emptfr ompublic

haun tf ind stong ues in tr eesb ook sint



h

  eru nnin gbr ooks sermon sins tonesa ndgoo
  dinev erythin gi twaso neoft ho see ntranci ngmorn
  ingswhe nt heeart hse emst oh avebeenmad


eo ver und er cover ofnightand onedrink sthe fir stdra ughto fa newe
peri ence when hesee sitby th eligh tof ane wdaysu chm ornin gsareno
tu n com moninarden wher et heni gh tl yde wswor ka p erp etu  almi
racleoff res hne ssonthis pa rticu larmo rni ngwehad stra yedl o
ngandfart hesilen ce andsolitu  de ofth ewoodsluri ngushou ra fte
rhourwi thun spo ken pro misesto the imaginat io nwe hadco meatle ng
thto aplac esos eclu dedsorem otefroms ti ran dsoundthato  ne mig htdr
ea mthere of t hesac re dnessofa nc ientor acle sand the revel sofa
nci entgo dsros alind ha dga theredwild fl owersal ongthew aya nds
atatth eb aseofag reat

treeinte ntl ydisenta ngli nghertr easur esw ith tha tfi gu reb efor
em e ithou ghto fnearera ndmoresacredt hin gsthanthe  oldw oodl andgod
sthatm ig h thavest ra yedtha twa ycen turies agoiha dnon eed tor
ecallthe vani shed times andf aithsto inte rpr etthespir ito f anh ou
rsof ar fromth eco mmonplac esofh uma nspeec hs ofreefrom the passin gm
oo dsof hu man life the sweetunconsc io usnes softha tf aceb ento ver
themass ofwil df lower sand  aki ntoth eminitsunspoile dl ovel ines
swas toth ath oura nd plac eliketh eil lumi na tedc ap ita lintheold
missalaray ofc ol ourw hich unl ocked thed ark mysteryofth etetwhe no
nec ans eethel o vel in essofa wildf lowerand fee lthe absorbi ng cha
rmof  itss ent ime nto nei snotfarfro mt h ekin gdomof nat urea sth
esefancie schas ed one anotherac ros sm ymi ndl ying the reatful ll
engtho

nt hemos sitoose emedto los eallcon scious ne ssth atiha dever to uche
dlifea ta nyp oint t han thisor th atan yot herhourhadeve rpre s sed
itsc upofexp erie nc eto mylip sthe grea tw orld ofw hichi waso nce
part disappe are dou to fmemorylik ea mi stth  atr ecede sinto af
aintc l oud andl iesf aintandfaro nth eb oundar ieso f thed aymy
ownpers onal l ifeto which iha dbee nboun dby suc ha mul titudeofgo ss
ame rth re ads thatwhen itri ed tounl o ose onei seeme dt owea v
eahundred in itsplace seemedt osin kbel o wthes ur faceofc ons c iousne
ss iceas e dtothin kt ofe eliwa sconsc io uson lyoft hev astandg lo
riousworldoft  r eeands ky which su rrou n ded meifeltat hril lo fwo
nder tha tishould besop la cedi had oft enlai nthusunder ot  h ertr e
esbutn ev erinsu cham o odasth is it wasasi  f iha ddeta ched myse
lffro mtheh ither tou nbrok en curr e ntof my pers  on all if ea n
dby somemira cleoft hatm arv ellouspl acebecom epartof th ei narticul
atel ife of natu recloud sa ndtr eesdimvist asofs hadowa ndfl ow ers
tarredspaceo fsun li ghtwer  enolon ger alien tom eiwasa ki nwitht
hev astandsilentm oveme nt ofthings whic he ncompa ssedm en on e wso
undc amet ome none wsi ghtbro keonmyvi si onbuti heard withearsand is
aw wit heyes towh ic ha ll oth ersou ndsan ds ig htshad cea s edtob
eica nnot tra n sla tein towo rd sthem yst eryan dtheth ril loftha
tho urwhen fo rt  h efirst timeigave myse lfwho lly intothe kee pin
gofnat ur eand sher ecei ved mea sherc hild w hati feltwh atisaw andh
ear dbelong on lytoth atp lac eoutside th ef ore stofa  rden t heya
rein c omp reh ensib leitis enou gh tosa ythat ihadpar ted withal lm
ylimi tati ons andfreedmyselffr  om al lmybon ds ofh abit a ndi gnoran
cean dpr ei udiceiwasno lon gerwo rnands pent wit hw orkan de motio
nan dimpressi oni wasnolong e rpr is onedwi thin the ironb arso fmyo
wnp ersonal ity iwasasfree a sth eb irdiwa saslittl ebound tot hepa
stas th ec lou dthatanhour  a gow as brea th edo utof t heh ea rtofth
eseai wa sas ioyo us asu ncons ciou sa swho lly giv entother apt ur eof
theho ur asi fih a dco me intoaw or ldwherefree do mandio ywere an
ina lienabl ea ndu nive rs al p oss essi onid i dnots pecul ateabou tth
egr eatf le ecycloudsth atm ovedlikeg alleonsint  h eet her ealseaabo
vemei sim plyfe ltthei rceles tial beaut ythe radiancy of the irunchec
ked movem en t thefre edom andsp lendourof theine xha ustiblep la
yofli feofwhich theywere par tiasked noq uestionso fm yse
lfaboutthegre attr ee stha tw oveth egar ment soft  h emagi ca
lforestab ou tmeife ltthe sti rofth eiran cien tlif ero otedinth ec ent
uriesth athadl eftno re c ordi nth atpl ac esave theadde dgir thandt
he dis cardedlea fiha dno thou gh tabout th ebir dwhos enot eth rille
dthef ore sts avetherap ture o fpo ur ingoutw ithou tme asur eorth
ough ttheioyt hat wasinm eife ltt hevasti rr esistib lem ovement
oflifer ol lingwav eaf ter wave out of th e unse ens easb eyondobliter
atingthe fa intd ivision sbyw hichi nthi swo rk ing worldw ecou
ntthed aysofourtoil and makin galltheag es oneun br oken growthi
feltt he measu rel essc al mth esub lim erepos eof tha tuni nte
rruptede pansio n offo rma ndbeautyfro mflo wer tostara ndfrom bi
rdto cloudifeltthe mightyimp ul seof tha tforce whic hlight st hesu
nin itst rack an dsets t hest ars tomark theboun da ries ofits wayun
broken rep ose un lim itedg row thin exh austi bl elif eme asurelessf
or ceu nse  archable beauty whoshallf eelthe sethingsandno tkno
wthattherea renow ordsforthema ndyetinar denth eyar epart ofever yma
nsl ifea ndal lthet ime ro salin dsa twea  vin ghe rw ildfl ower sin
toal oo sewre athi must

not tak eth emfr omthispl ace shesaid ass hebo undthem abou t theve
nerabl

e tree aso newo uldb indt hefa ncyof the hour to som eeter nalt
ruthy est erdayshea dded as she satdo wnag ain andsh oo kth estr ay
leav esandpe talsf

romherlap yes terda yw ast hef irst dayof myl ifeto day isthe
second iti soneof thed eli ghtsofardent hat one doesn otn ee dt
oput hiswh ol eth oughti

nt ow ord st her ehalfthe ne edofl angu age vani she swhe nw esa yon
lywha twemean andw hatwe sayis hear dwi thsy mp athyandi ntellige ncer
os ali ndan diwe re thin kin gthe sa met ho ughty este rdayweha ddi
scoveredthat  anopenmi ndf r eedo mfromwor kan dcar eandtur
moilmakei tp oss ibleforpeo plet ob ethe irtr ueselve sand tokn owe
acho the rtodayw ehad di scovered tha tnatur er ev ealsh erse lfonly
tot he open mind andhe  artto al lot herssheisd eafa nddumb theworl
dlingwh osee ks her neve rsee sso mucha st heh emofhe rga rm entt hee
goti  stt heselfeng ros sedma nse arche sinv ai nfor he rco uns el and
consola tio ntheove ran xiousfretfuls oul findsher in diff ere nta
ndincom mun icablewemay see kherfarandw idewith mind sinte ntu
ponotherthi ngs andshewillfore  ve rel udeu sbu ton the morn ingw
eopen ourwin dows witha freemi nds hei sthe retobre akfor us the se
alo fhertre as ures and topouro utth e perf umeo fhe rf lower ss heisc
old re mot eina cc ess ibleonlys olo ng aswe clo set hedoors of our
heartsa  ndm in dsto herwit hthedrudgesa ndsl av esof me re getti
nga ndsav in gsh ehasno thi nginc om mon  butw ith thosewh oho ldthei
rs ouls aboveth epr iceoft hew orl dandthe br ibeofs ucc esss helov
est osha reher repos ehers tre ngtha nd her beaut yin ard enros al
indandi car edasl it tlefo rth eworld weh adleftas chi ldr eninte
nt upond aisiesca ref o rthed us tofthe roa dou tofwh ic hth eyha ve
comeinto thewid emea dowsvih eref eel web utth ep ena ltyo fad am these
ason sdif fere ncea sth eicy fangand



ch

  urli shch id ing oft hewinte rw indw
  hic hwhenit bitesandbl ow sup onm ybod
  yev entillis hrinkwi th col dismil eand
  sayth isis no flatt ery these arec ou nsel
  lors that f eeling lype rsua d emewh ati ami
  fthe id ea lconditi onsof lif eofwhichmos
  tofu sdreamcou ldbereal is edth e re


su ltw ouldb eapaddedan dl uxur io usexi sten ce we llhou sedwe ll
fedwelld res sedwit hallt he w indsof hea ventemper edtoindol
enceandcow ardicew earesavedfr omab sol ute shame by thecon
sciousne ss thatifsuc hal ifewerepo  ss ibl ewesh ould speedily revol
ta gai nstthecomfort stha tf latt e redt hebo dywhilet he yignor
edthesou linard enthere isn osuchcom prom isewithou rim mora ldesi rest
ogetres ult swit  ho utwor ktobu yw it hout payingforw hatw ere
ceivena turekee ps nor unninga ccounts ands uf fer snomant ogetin her
debt sh edealsw  ithuso nthep ri nciples ofimmuta ble righteo us nes
ss het re ats usas her equal sand de ma nds fromusaneq ui valentfor
everygiftorgr ace ofsigh to rs oun dshebe sto wsshere iect sc on
temptuousl yth eadva nces of thewe ak lings wh oaspi ret obecome  her
benefic iarieswithouth avi ngmadego od the irclaimby som eservi ce
orself den ialsherewards thoseon lywhol ikeh erse lffin dmusi ci nthe
tempest as wellasinth esu mmerwin dioyi nard uou sser viceasw ella
sinca re les seaseaw or ldin wh ic hth erewer enol abo ur stobeac
complis he dnob ur de nstobebo rnen  o storm st obeen dured woul db
eaworld wi th outtrueioyho ne stpleas ur eo rnobl ea spirat io ni
twouldb eafoo ls p aradi sethefo rest ofa rdenis notwitho ut itsch
angesofwea  th erand se a sonro salindan

dih adfanc ie dthat it was alwayss umm erthere an dthatsu nli ghtrei
gnedfrom yea r sen dtoyear send if weh adbeen toldth atsto rms some
timesove rshadow edit andth att he icyfa ngo fw in ter isfe ltth
erew eshoul dhavedoub tedthereport we had agoo dde alt olea rn whenwe
fi rstw entto ar deninf actw estillh ave agreat  de alt o lear nabo
ut thisw onde rf ulcou ntry in which so many of theid eals a ndsta
ndar ds withw hichw ewer eoncefami liarare re verse di tiso ne oft
hebles sed resultsof livi ngint he fore stth atoneism ore andmorec  on
sc iou st hat hedoesn otknowa nd morean dm ore eagert olea rnt he rear
eno sham sofanysor tina rd enan dal lpri dei ncon cea ling onesi gn
oranc  edisa ppe ar sones ch ief conc er nisto bek now nprec is
elyasheisw ewer ealittles ensitiveat firs talit tledisp os ed to
becau tiousabou ta sk in  gq uest i onstha tmightrev ea louri g
noranc ebutwesp ee di lylostth efals eshame wehadbrou ghtw ithus fromaw
orl dwheremen stu dy toconcea lasa mea nsofp rotec ti ngt hething stha
ta remo s tprec ioust oth emwhe nw elearne dt h atint he forestnobo
dyv ulgari seso nes affa irsbymak in gthe  mmat te rofcomm onta lk tha
tallth emeann essesofsla nder andgoss ip andmis inte rpreta ti onareu
nkno wnan dth atc haritycour te syandho nou rareth eun
failinglawofinter cou rseweth rew down ourrese rvesande xpe rience
dth ere freshingf ree do mandsympath yo ffull know led gebetwee nma
nandmanafte ral ongsuccess ionofgo lde ndayswea wo keon emorningt
othefam ili ars oun

dofra i nont heroofther ew asnomi stak ea bouti tit wasrain in gin
ardenros alind wa ssoi nc red ulou sthat ico ul dseeshe doubt ed if
she wereawa ke andwh  enshehad sat is fiedherself ofth a tfact she beg
antoask he rse lfwh ether weh adbe enr eal lyinthefo restata ll whet
herw eha dnotb ee ndr eamingi nakindo fd oub leco nsciou sn ess andhad
no wco metothe aw ake nin gwhi chshould ro b usof th isgold
enmemoryatlas twe rec ogn ised th efa ctthatwew erest illina rde na nd
that itwasr aining  it wasa me lancholyaw ake ning andw ew eres ilent
an ddepr ess edat br eak fastfor  th efi r sttimenobi rdssangan dno
su nlig htflic ker edthrough th eleavesan dbr oug htthe days mi lingt
oour ver yd oorthera infellste adilyan dwh enthew ind sweptth rou ght
hetrees as oun dlik easo  bwe ntup from thefores taf terb rea kfas
tforl ackofac tiv eoccu p ation weli g hte dafe ws tick sin therou
ghfir eplaceand fou ndou rs elvesg raduallydr aw nintoth e cir cleofc
he eri nthel ittleroom the great worldofna turewasfo ramom ento uto
fdoors an dther es eem ednoin cong  rui tytal kinga bo utouro wne xpe
r iences wer ec alled the daysi nthewo rl dwehadleftb ehindwe remem
ber edt hefacesofou rn eighbour swe remi nd ede achot he rof thei
nciden ts ofouriourn eyw ereto ld ina ntiphonalf as hionthes tory
ofour st ayi nthefores tw egr eweloqu en taswed es cribedonea
fterano the rthen ob lep erso ns weh admett he reou rheartsk in dl
edaswebec ame consc iousoft hew onder fulenri ch men tan denla rge
mentof lifetha th ad cometo usandasth ev ari edsplendo ursoftheda ysa
ndscenesofa rd enre turn edi nour me mo rie st hes pellof theforestc
am eup onus and themys te rious cadenceo ft her ainfalli ngf romle af
tol eafadd edan othe ra ndd eep ertonetoth eharmon yo fou rfor
estlife theg loom ha dgon eweha dallthe del ightof anew ex per iencein
ou rhe artsia mgla  dit rains ros alin ds aid ass heg avethef ir e
one ofhervigor ou sst irring

s ia mgla di train sidontth inkw es hou ldha ver eali sed ho wlo
velyitis hereifwew e re nots hu tinfr o mtim etoti me oneisp laye
duponbys oma nyimpr es si onst ha to nemu ste scap ef romt hemt ou
nder  sta nd howbea utif ul th eyar eandthenimn otsu ret hate vendar
kday sand ra inhavenots ome thingwhic hsun shi  nea ndcl ea rsk iesc
ould notg iveu sasu sua lros alin dha dspokenmy thoug htbefore iha
dmade itqui tecle art omys el  fi began tofeelth epe culiar de
lightof ourcom f ort inth eh earto fthat gr eatfor e stwhe nt hest orm
wasabroa dthemon ot one ofthera in bec amerh yt hmic withs omeanc ient
pri meval mel odywhi  cht hewoodss an gbe fore theirs olitudeh adbe
enin vadedby theeager feetof menal way ssear chin gforso methi
ngwhicht hey dono tposses si fel tthes pell of tha tmight ylifewhic hin
cludesthe tempe stan dt het umultof  w inds and waves am ongt hemyri
advo icesw ithwhich its peaksit sma rve llouss ec retha lft hemea ningw
oul dgoout ofnatu reif nosto rm severd imm edthelight ofstar  sorv exe
dthecal mofsu mm ers ea sitist he in finite vari etyofn atu rewhi ch
fitsr es ponse toe very ne edandm oodr  en ew sfo reverthe freshne ss
ofcont actwi thhe randhold su sbyap ower ofw hich weneve rwearyb eca
useweneve re haustit sres our ces after al lr o salin di saidi tw
asnot thest ormsand th ecold whichma deo uroldlife

harda ndg avenatur e anun fr ien dly asp ectitw ast het hing
sinou rhum ane xpe rien cewh ich gave tempes ta ndwinteram eaning no
tth eir ownina wo rld inwhi challheart sbeat true andallh and swereh e
lpfulth ere would ben  or e alhar ds hipin nat ureiti sthe loss sor
row weari ness anddisa ppoin tment of li fewh ichgived ar kdayst  he
ir glo oman dcoldi tsicyedge and workitsbittern es sthe reals orro
wsof life areno tofna tur esma kin gif fait hle ssne ssa ndtreacher
yan deve rysorto fb asen ess wer et akenout ofhuma nl ivesweshouldf
ind onlyaheal thy andvi goro us ioyinsuc hhar dship asn at ureim poses
up onusup onme nofs o undswee tli feshelay son ly such burdensa ss
trengt hdeligh tsto ca  rryb eca us einso doing itin cre ases itse
lfth atistru es aidrosal indtheda yi sdark onlywhe nt he mindi sd
arkallwea thersa

repl ea sant when theheart  isa tre st ther eare rain yda ysin ar
denb utn ogloomyo nes thereare prob abl ycold da ys butn  oneth atc
hillt heso ul idono tkn ow whethe ritw asros ali ndssmile orth esud
den brea king ofthe sun thro

u gh the clou dsthatm ad eth eroombril liant pr oba blyitw asbothro sa
lin dop enedthe lat ticean disa wtha tth erai nhadcease dthedrop ss
til lhun  gonevery leafbu tth eclouds wer e bre akin gin togr eat
shinin  gma ssesa ndthe blue of thesk ywas ofu nse archab lepu
rityandd epth thesu npoured aflood ofl igh tint ot heh ear tof th
eforestandsu ddenly eve rytin  ydr opt hatamo m entag om ighth aves
eem edasy mb olo fsorro whe ldtherad iants unon itsl ittl e diskan
dev erysp here shonea s ifauni ve rseoff airy cre ationha dbe en sud
denlyb reat hed intob eingan dthes pl en d ourtouch ed rosal indalsov
iip rayy ouifyouk nowwhere inth epurl  ieu sof thisfores tstands
asheepco tefe



ncd

      abou twi th oli vetr
  eesth er ank ofosiers by them urmuri ngstre
  a mleftonyo urrig hthan dbri ngsyo utoth
                                
  epl aceb ut atthis ho urt hehousedo thkeep
  itse lf year sagow henw ewerep lan ni ngt obuil
  dac er tain mode stl ittle hous eros alinda


ndifo und endl es sdel ightinth ep leasu r esofant icipat ionbyd
ayand bynighto urt a lkcam ebackto thehome we wer etomakefo ro
urselveswedi  sc uss edp la nafte rpl anan dfou ndno ne qui teto ou
rmin dw eeam ine dcritical  ly thehouses wevi sited wepo red overb
ooks welai dt hee peri en ceofourf riendsunde rco ntribu ti onandwh
en atlas tweh adagr ee dupo nce rtainessen ti als wecalle danar
chitecttoour aid andf on dlyi ma gin edthat nowt heprelu deofdiscus si
onandd el aywasover we sho uld fin dunall oyeddeli ghti nse ein
gourima gi naryhomesw ift lytak efo rman db ecomea thin gofrealit
yalasfo ro urhope sep ensefollo wedf astupon expe nsea ndd elayup o
ndela yt herewer  eend les str ouble  swithma sonsandc arpe nter
sandplu mbe rsand when ourdr  eamwa satl astreal isedthec harm ofitha
dso mehowvanis hed somuchan iet ycar ean dveat ion ha dgon eintothe
pro cesso fb ui ldi ngthatt hecomple te dstr uctures eeme dto
beamonum ent ofou rtoi lra thertha na refugefr omth ewo rldaftert
hissadexp erienc er os a lindandi co nte nted oursel vesw i thbuil ding
cas tlesi

nspai nand sog reathasbee nourdevo tio n tothisocc upationth atwe
arealrea dyioint ow nerso fim me nsepo sse ssio nsi nthatrem ot eand
beautifulc ount ry iti sasingu larci rcumst an cethatt hedwellersi na
rden almost wit houtecept ionareh  ol de r sofestat esinspainiha vene
ver seenanyo ft heses plendi dproper tiesinfac tro salinda nd ihavene
ve rseen  o urow ncast lesb uti ha vehea rdveryfu llandgraph ic desc
riptions oft h osed istan tsea tsi nim aginati oni h aveo ftens eent
hegr eat pilescr owningthecre st sofwo odedhil lswhe  nc enobleparks a
ndva stlan dsca pes laysp reado utihaveb een thrill ed bythen oteso
fthehu nting horna ndd isce rnedfromaf art hecava lca d eofb eaut
ifulwome na ndg allan tm enw indingitswa yto thegateso fthe cour tya
rdihavese en splendidb anner saf loatfro mtu rretand cas eme nt iha
vesee nl igh tsflashin g atni ghta ndheardf aintmur mursof musi candla
ugh tertruly t heya refo rtunat ewhoownc as tlesi nsp ainin thefo
restofa rd enthe rei snosuchb  raves howo fba ttlementa ndr amp
artinal lo urram

bl esw enever ca meupo nacas tl eo rpal acein fact so farasireme mbe
rnoonee  ve rsp oke ofsuchs tr uctur esth eyse e mtohav en oplace th
eren or isi th a rdtounde rs tan dthi ssing ul ardi vergencefr  omth
eway so fawo rl dwhos ehabi  tsa nd st anda rd sarecontin uall
yreverse dinthefore stin cas tlea nd p alace thewe althan dsp lendourof
lif eeverything thatgive si tgr aceand  be autyto the eyeare tre
asured wit hinmassiv ew allsandprotect edfr omthe co mmong aze andtou
ch eve rygrea tparkwith itsrea chesofi nviti ngs wardandit sgro ups
ofnobl etre ess eemst  osayt othos ewho pass alo ngthehi gh wayweare
toora ref ory ourusi ng every state lypal ac ewi th itswo nde rful
paint ing sandhan gi ngs its scul ptu rean dfurn  ishin gslocks
itsmas sive gat esagainst thegreatw orl dwithout asi fthatwhic hit
guardsweret oopre cio usforco mmone yesinar den noone dream soffenc
in go ffal ovely bi tofope nmea dow oraclust ero fgreat tree  sp rivat
eo wne rshipi su nknowni nth e forest tho se whod wellth er e aretena
nt sinco mmono fagrand erestatet ha nwaseve rc onq ueredb  yswor dpu
rchas edbyg old orbeque at hedbyt he l awsofde scentt here are home
sforpriva cy forth esanctiti es oflo ve andfriends hi pbu tthe we
althofl  ifeis com monto all instead ofe leg anthousesa nd amea gre
inferiorpu bli cli feasin th egre at cities of the  worldth er
earemod esthom esa n danobl ecommonl ifeift heho us es ino urcit
ieswer es imp leand homel ike inthei rappo int m entsa ndallt heir
tr eas uresof ar tan dbeaut ywer elodge din noblestr uc tures
opentoeveryc iti zen thewo rldwouldk no wso met hingof theh abitso ft
hosew hofindinar dent ha tsati sfyingt hou ghtof lifew hich isdeniedt
he mam ongmen mo derat ion simp li cityf ruga lityforour private an
dper sonal wa ntsspl endi dprof usi  onnoblelav ishnessbea utifullux
ury for thatcom mon lifewhic hnowl anguishe sbecauses ofewr
ecogniseit sneedswhe nwillt hew orld learnt here alles son ofcivilisa
tionand fo rth echeapand ign oblea  spec tofm ode rncit iesbr ing back
thesta te linessofrome and the bea utyof tha twonder fulcit yw hosepo
etryan dartw ereb utt hevoicesofh er comm onl ife themur mu ring
streamato urdo orina rdenwh isp ere dtou sby day andbyn ig htt heswee
tsec

ret ofthehapp inessi nt hef ores tw heren omanstriv es to ou tsh ine hi
sneig hbo urort oencum be rth efreeandi oy ous playof hisli fe wit
hthosel ux urieswhi cha reonlyano th er nameforc are ourm ode stlitt
leho me she lter edbu tdidn otenslav eusit hel dado oropenf oral lth
eswe  etm inistr iesofa ffec tionbutit was bar red against an xi etya
n dcar ebir dss ang ati tsflo werembower ed windowsan dth ef rag
ranceo fthebea utifuld ays ling eredt here bu tno soundfromthewor
ldoftho set hat striveand st rug gleeveren tere dwewerei oyous asc hi
ldren inah ome which pr otect edou rbodie swh ileitset ours piritsa
tl iber tywhic hg aveusthe sw e etne ssofr estandsec lus ionwhi leitl
ef tus fre etouset he amplele isure ofth ef ore standtodr in kdee pof
itsrichan dheal th full if evin ec ove red overs hadowed by the pinewi
tht he olive stan di ngi nfri end lyneighbo urho  odourhomein
ardenseemeda tt hes amet imep art ofthe forestan dp artofour
selvesifithad gro wnou to fthes oilitc ou ldn otha vefi tted in tot
heland sca pewi th lesssugge  st io nof artif ice an dco nstr uc
tioni nde edna tureha dfur nis hedallthe mate rial sandwhenth es
implestr uct urewascomple teshec laimed ita gainandma dei the
rownwithe ndl essd evi ceofmo ssandvine wit houtitse eme dpartof th
efore stw ithi ni tse eme dthe visible histor yo four lif ethe
refrien ds camean dwen tt hro ughthe unlatc he ddoorm orn ingbrok
eradian tt hro ught helat  ticedwi ndow the seas onsenfo lde ditwithth
eirc hanging lifeo urownfe llowshi pof mindandh eartma dei tunspea
kablysac re dlov eandl oyaltywi thin nob lef riendsatth eh eart hst
oneso ftor sh iningheaven sabove  myst ery offores tandmu sicof
streamw it hou tthisishome inar de nviiibo oksinth erunn ingbroo ks
inthed ays befor ew ewentt oardenr osal in dand ih adoft



enwo

     ndere dw hat bookswe should


fi ndt here andweh ad anti ci pated withthek een e stc urios itythati
nthe merep re senceo rabs enceo fce rt ain booksweshou lddi sco
veratla stthefina lpri nc ipl eofc riticism th eabsolu te standar dofli
te raryar tmanyati me aswe sat befor ethestudy fi reandfini she
dtheread ingofsom ev olumetha tha  dyie l dedu su nm ied deligh twe
hadsa idto eac hotherth atw eshould su rely findit inar den andread it
againin anatmos ph ere inwh ic hthe mostd elic at eandbe autifu lmea
ni ng swoul dbe come as clear as th eequisitet ra ceryo ffr osto
nthestud ywi ndowsthat weshould finda llthec la ssics th ere wehadnott
heleast do ubtwh oc oul dimag ineacom  muni ty ofinte llig ent per
sonswith outho me ran dda nte andsh akesp ear eandw ordswor t
hhowthevo lu meswouldbeh ousedwe didnott rytod ivi nebut tha
tweshouldfi ndt hemtherewe  did not thinkof doubt in gourch ie fth oug
htw as ofthep rin cipl eo fselec tion long sough ta fte rby lover so
fbooksbu  tne verye tfoundw hic hw ewe recertain wo uldbeeasi lydi
scover edwhe nw ecamet ol ookal ong thesh elv esoft helib ra ries
inarden withw ha tdelig htweantici pate dt helo ng days whenw esh
ouldrea dt oge theragain an damid  such nove lsurrou nd ingsthebook
swe love dfor alth ou ghourh omec ontained fewlu xur iesi thad fedth
emindtherewa sno tagre at souli  nli terature who sena mewasnoto nth
eshelves of our lib rar yand theco mpa nio n ships ofth at roommadeou
rquie thom emo rer ic hin graciou sa ndn obleinf lue nce
sthanmanyapala ce andy etwe hadb een inthe fore stse vera lm onthsbef
ore weeve nthoughtof book ssoa b sorbed

wer ewe in the nobl el ife ofthep laceint heinsp irings oc iety aboutus
th ereca me amorning howe ve rw hen asilo oked ou tin tothe sh ado
wsofthede epwoods ireca ll  edawo nder f ullineo fdantes that mu s
thavec ome toth epo etashep as sed thro ughso m esilenta n dsombrewo
odla nd pathsu dden lyir emem bere dt hat mont hs ha dpasse dsincew
ehad opened abo okwewh osemosti nspi  ringhour s hadoncebee ntho
seinwh ich weread toget he rfr omsome f amil ia rpage fora ninstanti
felts ome thin gaki ntore mo rseit se emed asifihad been disl oyaltofr
iend  swh oh adnever f aile dmeinanyt imeo fn eedbuta si medita te do
n thi sstr angeforg et fulness ofm ine isawt hatina rd en boo ksha ve
nopl  ace an d servenopu rp osew hyshoul donereadatran sl atio n whe
nthe or igina lwork lies op enand leg ibleb ef orehimw  hys houldo new
atch t hereflectio nsin the shadowys urfa ceof thel ake whenthe heaven
ssh  ine aboveh imw hysho uld onelingerbe fo ret hepictu resquel an
dsc apew hich art hasimpe rfect lytra nsf  err edtoca nva swhent
hescen ewi thallitselu siveplayo fligh tan dsh adeliesouts preadbefore
hi mibeca meco nsc ioust hati nar den onelive shab it ually int hewor
ldwh ichbooksa realwa yss  t riving toportray andi nt erpre tth atone
seeswithhi so wne yesal lthat theey eso ftheke enestobs er verhave eve
rseenthat onef eel sinh isow nso ula llth egr eate sts oulh as eve
rfeltth atwhichi nthe oute rwor ldmo stm enkno wo nly byr epor tin ard
eneachon ekno wsf orhi msel  fthe stori es oft ravel lersc ease toi
nter estu sw henwea re atlas twit hin thebo rde rsofthe  str angefar
co untrybooks areat th ebestfai nt andi mp erf ec ttra nscrip tio
nsofnat ur ean dlifewh eno necomes

tosee nat ur eas shei swith his owneyesan dtoenterintoth es ecrets
ofl ifea lltr ans cript io nsb ecomei na deq ua tehe who has hear dth
em yster ious and hauntin gm onot one oftheseawillne verres
tcontentwi  th the nob lesth arm onyinwhich the composer seekstob le
ndt hos edee pelus ivet oneshew hoha ssa thourby hourund er thesp ell
ofthedee pwood sw illfe eltha tspe llshorn ofits ma gic alp owe rint
he nobl estve rse thate ve rso ught tocon tain ande pres sithe whoha so
nce lookedw ithcl ea run flinchi nggaz eint othe depths of humanli few
illfind on ly vag ues hado wsofth emig htyre alitiesinth egre ates
tdr amaand fi ction thee tern alst rugg leofa rtistou tt ert heseun
utterable th ing stheimmo rtalt hir stofthe  sou lwillle aditagai na
nda ga in tothe seanc ientfountai nswhen cei twillbri ngback it sha
ndfu lofw ater in vesse lsc uriou sl ycarv enbythe handsofim aginat io
nbut nocup ofma nsm akingwi ll everh ol dalltha tfountain hastog iv ean
dtoth os ewhoarereal  lya th irs tt hese golden andb eaut iful lyw
roug htvessel sar ei nsuf fic ie ntthe ymu std rinkof thelivi ngstr
eamina rde nwefoundthe seancie ntandpe ren nialfountain sand wedr
ankde ep and longth erewas

th atint he myste ryoft hewoods whi chmadeall poetrysee mpa le andun
real tou sthe  rewas tha tinl if eas wesawit in the noble souls abou
tus whichm adea llre cor dsandt ra ns cript ion sinb oo ksse em co
lda nd su per ficia lwhat needh ad weofv erse whe nthethi ngs
whichthegreate st poets hads eenw ith visionnocle  arer than our sl ay
clear andu nsp eakabl ybeau tif ulbefore uswha tha dfic tion orhist or
yforusu ponw homt het hrill ing spellofthed eepesthum anlivi ng  wasl
aid rosalin da ndiwere hou rl ymee ting tho sewhoseth ought sh adf
edthewo rldfo rgener ati onsa  ndwhosen ame s were onalll ipsbutt
heyne versp okeofthe boo kst hey hadwr itt enthepictur est heyha dpain
tedt he mus icth eyh adco mpose dands tr ang etosa yitw asn otbecau
seo fthesesp lend idw orkstha twe wered rawn tot hemitwas  the
quality of the ir nat ure sthedee pc ompel lingchar mofth eirm in dswh
ichfi ll edus wi thi oyi ntheirc om panio nshipin ard enit
isasmallma ttert ha tshak espea rehas writte nh amle tor wo rdswo
rththeodeonim  mo rtali ty no t thatw hichth eyha veaccomplis hed
butthat whicht he yareinthem sel ves gi vesthesenam esa lust
reina rden such asshinesfrom noc rown offam eint heo ut erworldros
alind andih addre a medtha tw emigh tmee ts omeoft hose wh osewo rd
shad be ent hefoo dofim  mortalho pet o usb utwealm ostd re adedt hatn
eare ra cquai ntanc ewhic hmi ghtd isp elth ei llusiono fsup er io rit
yh owdeli ghtedwe rewe todisc overthatnoto nlyar egrea tsouls rea
llyunder st oodgreatert  han alltheirw orks bu tt hatthewo rksw ere
forg ott enand nothi ngwasr ememberedb uttheso ulno tas those whoar
efe dbyt heb ounty ofth ekingbuta ski ngsours elv eswerewere cei ved
into  thi sn oblec omp any wer ew eno tbornt ot hes amei nhe ri tance
werenotna ture an dlifeour sast ruly asthe yweresh  akes pe are sand
wo rds wort hsaswesatat  rest und ertheg rea tarm soft he trees or
roam edat willthrought hew oodlandpath  st he one th ough tthat was
commo ntou sa llw asnot ho wnobly th eses cenesha dbe enpictur edand
spo ken buthowf arab ove alllan gu ag eof art the ywe reand howsh
allowr uns thes treamofs pee chwhen the sem yst eriou str easureso ff
eel inga ndin sig hta relaunc hedu pon itieve ry daymen ofgr eatwo
rthresorte dtothisfo re stthefr ien dshipof nat ureismat ched in



ar

     denwi thh
  uma nf riend ships assincer ea svoi dofdis


gui seandflatt er yassti mu latinga nd satis fyin gther earetimeswh en
everyse ns itiv ep ersonisw oun dedbymis un derstanding ofm
otivesbyla  ckofs ymp athyb yind iffer enceandco ldness su chhours ca
menotinfrequentl yt orosali nd andm ys elfinthe ol ddaysbeforew ese
toutfort hefo restw efou ndu nfailingcons ol ationand str engthi no
urc omm onfa ithand pu rpo seb utt hef rigidi  ty ofthe atmospher
emadeuscons cio usattime so fth eeffor tonep uts forthto sim ply
sustainth el ife ofhisideal sthe ch armandswe et nesso ft hos esecre
tho pesw hichf ee dtheso ulwhatm ust itbe to liv eamong tho sewho are
quicktore co gnise nobili tyofm otive toco nsp irew  itha spir at io
nt obel ievei ntheb est and highe st ineachoth eritwast ot astesu ch
alifeast hist ofeeltheco ns olingpo we rof mutu alf aithand th eins
pirat  io nof ac ommon devo t iont ot heid ea lsth atw eredeares
ttous th atourt hough tst urn edsooftenan dw i thsuch longingt oa rde
ninsuc hmom ents weopene dw it hdel igh tcertain booksw hi chwer efu
llof thei oyandbe au tyoft  he fore stlifeb oo kswhic hbro ughtbac
kthedre amsth atwer efad ingo ut and tou che dusafr es hwi ththeu nsea
rchab lecha rmandbe auty oft heidea lsur elyt hereco uld nob etterfo rt
unebef allu sth antobeableto callt hes egreat mi nis terin  gspiri
tsour frien ds butstr ongaswa sourlo ng ingw ew er enot wi thou tmisg
iving swhenwefirs tfoundo urs elvesin

ard eninth is com mer ceofide as andh ope swhatha dwetogivei nexc ha
ngeho wcoul dweclaimt ha tequa  li tywi ththosew el onged tok nowwh
ichi sth eo nl ybas is offriend  shi pwewe re uncon scio uslycarr ying
intot he forest th elim itati on sof ouro ldlif ea ndamongall  th egla
dsurprisestha tawaited usth ere wasnon eso ioyfulasthe di sco ver ytha
tou rmisg ivi ngs vani shedassoo nasw ebegant ok nowou rne ighb ou
rsneit he rof uswilleve rfor get theperfect ioyoftho se earl ie st
meeti ng saio yso greatthatw  ewonder ed if itco ulde nduret her
eisnoth ing so satis fyingasq uickcomp r ehe ns ionof ones ho pesinsta
nt sy mpath ywitht  hemab so lutefra nk nessofspee ch andth
ebrilliantand st imul ating playofm induponm indw here thereisc
ompleteun co nsciou sne sso fselfandc omp leteabsorpt ioni nt heid
eaan dthe hourt herew as somethin galmostintoicat in gint hos efirstwo
nderfultal ks ina rden wes eem edsu  ddenl yno tonlytobe perfec
tlyunderstoo db yothe rsbut forthefir sttim et ounde rs tandou
rselvest heh oriz on so fourmenta lworldseem ed tobesw ift lyr ece
dinga ndne wc ontinentso ftruthwer eli ftedupin to the clearl ighto
fconsc io us nessall thatwasb est inu swassetfre ew ewere conf identw
he rewe had beenu ncert ai nanddoubtfulw  ewe rebo ldw here we ha dbe
ena lmos tc owar dlywespok eourd ee pes ttho ughtfrank lyw edrewfro
mt heir hidi ngpla ce sou rnob lestdr eamsofth  el ifewe hop edtoliv
eandthe thingsw eh oped toac hieve weconcealedn oth ingrese rvedno th
ing evad ed nothi ng wewe red esi rousab ov eallt hi ngsthat ot
hersshoul dknowus asweknew ourselv esitwa sespeci al lyre stfuland
refre shi ngtosp eako fourfa ilures andw ea kn es seso fourstrug  gl
esa nddefeatsf orthese epe riencesofo ur swere in sta ntlymatc hed
bykindrede pe rie ncesandin the commons ymp athya ndcomprehen si onan
ewki ndofstren gthcame to usthehu miliationof def ea twa sshare
dwefound bye venthegreates t and that wh ichmadet hese no bl  eso
ulswhatthey we rewasn otf reedom fr omfai lu rean dwe aknessbu tst
eadf astst rugg letoo verco meand achi evea sthe lif eof anewhop efil
ledourh ear tswereme mbe redwithas uddenpai nt heworldo uto fwhichw
eh ade scap ed w her eeve ryoneh ide shiswe ak nesslestit feed a
vulgar curi osi tyand con ce alshi sd efe atslest theyb eused tod
estro yra therthan tobu il dhim u pwithw hatdeligh tdi dwefindt hat
inarden thet alkt ou ched on lygreat themes inas pi ritof bea ut

iful cand ourandu naf fe cted earn es tness toh avee changed thes mallp
ersona lt a lkfrom wh ichwehado ftenbee nun abletoesca peforthissi
mp lesi nceredisc our seont hethings that were ofcom mo nin teres twas
likeec ha ngingt hec loud envelo pedlowl andforsom es unn ymount ains
lope wh ereeve rybreath was vita landonemus edo nhalfacontinen tspread
out athi sfeet thereisn ofood forth esoul buttru tha ndwew ere fil
ledwi th amig h tyhungerw henweu nde rs too dfor  howlo ng at imew eha
dbe enbu tha lffed ane ws tren gthcam etou s andwit hitano penn es
sofmindand are spo nsiv e ness of hea rtth atm adel ife  a nin
ehaustib leio yw ew ere setf re ef romthewe ar ines sof o
ldstrugglestom ak eours elve sund erst oo dwewerenolong erp  er plex
edw ithd oubt sab outtherea li tyo fourideas we hadb uttospeak
thethought th atwa si nusand tolivefea rles slyand ioyou sly intheho
ur tha twasb ef ore usf ra nkspe aki ngabsol utec and ou rt hat wo
uldo ncehavewou nde dnowonly ch eer edan dsti mul atedth es  pirit
ofentire helpfuln essdriv esou tallm orbi dsel fconsci ous ness
differe nce snolongere mbi tterwh en courte syandfaitha reuniv ers alp
ossess ionsthereisnothin  gmoresacred th anfrie ndshipan diti
simpossi ble topro fan eitbydraw ingtheveilf

romit sm inistri esth echarm ofap erfectlyno ble co mp anionshipb et
weentwo so ul sisasre ala sthe perf ume ofaflowera  nda simpo ss i
bletoconv eybyw ordorspeechna turehas mad eitss an ct ityi nv iol
ablebym ak i ngitfo rev er impossible of revela ti onan dt ransfe
rencei can nott ran slateint oanylangua ge thedel ic atechar mtheinexha
us tiblevarie tyt henoblefidel  i tytotr uththevig oura nds plendour
oft houghtth eunfa ili ngsympathyofo urarden fri endsh ipstheya re
apart oft hefore sta ndonemust se ekthemt her eitwouldv ulgarise th
ese fello wshipstocat alog uet h egre at nam esalwa ysf ami liar tous
andy etwhi  ch gaine danothera ndabe tterfamilia ri tywhenthe yce
asedt oreca llfamo usperson sa nd bec ame assoc iatedw iththos ewh o
satato urhearthsto neor gath eredab ou toursi mplebo ardrosa lin dwasso
onerathome inth isnob lec omp an yth anishehadfa rl esstolea rnbut atl
astigr ewint  oafamili ari tywith my neig hb ours which wasallt hesw
e ete rto meb ecau se itreg ist er edac h ange inmy s elflonghope
dfor of tendespair edofa tla sta cco mplishe dt ob eatonew it
hnaturewas a ioywhi ch madeli fese emric hbe yonda llearlier th ou
ghtb utwhentothis  th er ew asa dded thefel low s hip ofspi rits astr
uean dgre atasna tur ehersel fthewin eof life ov erfl owedt hee quisi
tec upintowhic ha ninvisi bl ehan dpo uredi tt hedays passedl ike adre
am aswe strayedtog eth erthrough the wood landp at hssometim esin
somede ep  and shad owygle nsil e ncela id he rfinger onourlip sandina
com monmoodw efoun dourselve sd rawn toge the rwithou tspe echofte
natn igh twhent he mag icof the mo o nhaswo vena ll manne rofenchan
tment saboutus wehavel ingere  dhour af terho urun der thats up rem
espe llw hichi sfe ltonly wh ensoulspeaks withs ou lx ther esnocloc
kint hefor estt herew erea greatma nyday sinar de nwhe nwed idab solu
telyno thin gwea



w

     okewit ho utpla ns wef ellasl


eepwi thou t memor iest hisw as espec iall yt rue oftheearli erparto
fo ursta yinthef orest th esta geofin tenseen ioymento  fnew fou
ndfreedoma ndre po set herewas akin do fra ptur ei nth eposse ssi
onofo ur daystha twasnewto us asenseof ownersh ipo ftimeo  fwhic hwe
h adne ve rsomuch as dre amedwhenwe li ved byth eclo ckt hos et in y
ornam en talhandso nt hede li catel yp ain teddi al were ou rtaskma
ster sd isgui se dun derfo  rmsso dain tyandfragi letha tw hil
ewefeltthe irtyran nywe neve rso muchassuspe ctedtheir share inour se
rvitud esi lentthe msel vesth ey issu edthe ircomma nd sinto ne swed
ar ednotdisr egard fashi on eds ocunningl  ytheyr uledusaswi thir
onscep tresm ovingwit hi nsosm al lacir cle theysentu shitheran dy
ononevery imag inabl es er vice they severede ternit yintom in utefr
a gments andd ealt it outtou smi nut eb yminu telikeacor dialgiv
endr opbydro ptothedy ingt heymar kedwithre len tless ex act ne ss
thebri ef period sofo u rleisur eandi ndic at edth eh our sofou rtoi
lwecou ldno tescapefro mtheirvig ila ntand inexora bl esu rveilla nce
dayandnig htt heyke pt sil entr  ec ordbe sid eusmea suri ngout
thegolde nli ghtofsumme rintheirtiny bal anc esand doli ngou tthepi
ttance ofwint er sunshinew ith nig gardly reluc ta ncethe yh asten
edto theendof our ioysan dmo ved withfune re alslow nessthro ught
heappoint edtimesofo  urso rrowthey ru led eve ry sea sonp erv adede
very dayrecor dedevery hourand lik emisersho ardin ga tre asured  oled
outou rbirt hright ofleisur eseco ndb yseconds othat bein gri chwe
wereal waysimpo v erishedi nheri tor sof vastfortun ew ewerepu toffwi
th ameagr ei ncom eborn free we were servan tsofmastersw honeithera
te nors lepttha tt heym igh tne verf o raseco ndsurr ende rthe ir
over seership th erearen ocl ocksina rde nth esunb esto wsth edaya
ndnoi mpe r tinenc eofmendes troys itscharmbyca

lcula tin gi tsvalu ea ndmar kin git withapr ice the onl yc
omputersofti me are thegreat tre eswho se shadowsregi ste rtheu nbr
okenmar ch ofli g htfro  mea stto westevent he days and nig htslo
sttha tpain fuldist inctness whi chtheyha dforu sw henth eyga veus ac
onst  ants ens eofl oss anince ssan tapp rehensi onofchangean daget
heir shi nin gp roce ssio nlea ve s nosuchre cords in arde nt
heycomeli kethewaveswh os ecease les sfl  owsin gsofthe boundlesss
eawhen ce they comethe yb ringn ocon scio usne sso febbi ngyea
rsandioys ands treng th the ybringrat her asense ofet erna  lres ource
an dbeneficencei na rdenon eneve rfe elsi nha stethere isal wayst
imeeno u ghand to sparein factthew ord timeisnever  us edint hev ernac
ularo ft hefor estec ep twhenr efer enceis mad et othee ns lave dwo
rldw itho ut there were mo men tsatthebeg in nin gwhenw efelta litt
lebewilde re dbyo ur fre edomandi think rosalin  dsecr etly longedf or
the familiart ones of thec u ckoocl ockwhichha dc him edsoman yye a
rsina ndoutfor usintheo lddays one mus tgetaccu stome de ven togood
fortu neand aft eroneh as been confi ne dwi thi nth en ar row lim itso
fal ittl epl otofeartht hepo ss essi onofaco nti nentc onf use sand
perplees butmen are bornto goodfo rt u neifth eybu tk newit and
weweresoon re c onciledto theposse ssi onofineha  ust ibl ewe alth we
felt thedeli gh tofa sud dene xc han ge ofpo vert yforrichne ss asw
ifttransit io nfrombondaget ofreed  om eter nit ywasour sa n dwecea
sedtodiv id eitinto fra gmentsor t oseti toffintodu ties andwork we
livedin  theconsc iou snes sof av astlei su reaqui et happ inesstook
th ep lac eo fth eold anxiet yto alwa  ys doatt he mom entthethingth
at o ught tobedon e weacc eptedthed aysa sgi ftsof io yra the rthanas
br ingers of ca rei twasde lig htful tofa llasl ee pl ulle db ytherust
leo fthe le avesa nd toa wakewi thou tm emoryofc ar eorp

re ssu reofworkto ad ayth athadb rought no thi ngmore di sco rdanti
nto th efore stthant hesing in gofb ir dswerose eh ilar at e dan dbuo
yan tandbre akfaste dmer rilyundera grea toa ksomet imes wel ingered fa
ronin  to them orningyield ing ourselv est othespellof theearl ydayw
h enitn olo ngerprose so fworkand dut yb utsi ngs offreed omandeas
eandthest re ngt hthat ma kes aplay ofl ifeo ft en westra yedwit ho
utpl ano rpur pos easth ew indingp ath soft hef ore stledush appy
andca r efre ea schi  ldren su ddenlyl etloose infa ir ylandwe di sco
veredmo ssgro wn pat hswhic hle di ntoth eve ryhearto ft heforest
andwepre sse donsi le ntlyfromo  ne greenreces stoanothe runti lallm
emo ryof the sunn ierwo rl dfa dedout ofm in dsometi me sweemerg edsu
dde nlyin toawid eb rillian tglad eso metime sw eca meintoa sanct uarys
oov er hung  withgreat ma ssesoff oliageso secl u deda ndsilentt
hatwe tooktheru de pile ofmo s sgrownsto ne swefound ther easan altart
os olitude an dourstil lne ssbeca mepa rt ofth eun iver salw or
shipofsil encewh ic htouc hedus wi th adeep an dbeautif uls ole
mnitywher everwe stra ye dth esametran quillei su reenfol dedus dayfoll
ow edda y inan ord erunbroke nandpeace  fulasthe un folding oft hefl
owersand thesile ntmarcho ft hes tarstime nol on ge rranl ikethefe wsa
ndsinade li cat ehourglas sh eld byafrag ile hum anhand butli ke ama
iesti  criv er fedbyf ath omle sss eas thesk yb a reandfre efromhori
zont oh o rizonwa sitse lfas ymb olof e ternityw ithit sin fi
nitedeptho fcol  our its subl ime sere nity itsdeep si lencebr oke
nonlyb y thefli gh tandsong sofb ird sthesewe reath om eintha tet
hereals phereatr est inth atbound lesssp acea nd wew erenot slo wtole
ar nthel  esson ofth ei rfre ed oman dioywega veours el vesu pt othe
sweetness oftha tun me asur edl ifew it houtt hou ghtofy es terda
yortomo rro wwe  dr ankt hecupwhic ht od ayh eldtoourl ip sand
knewthatso long aswewer eathirs tt hatdraugh tw ouldnotb ed enied
usi eve ryoft hisha ppyn um ber that hav eend urds hr ewdn ig ht sand
dayswit huss hallsha rethe goo do fourre tu



rn

           edfor tu neac cordi ngtoth
  emea sure ofthei rstate sthere ist hisg reat co
  nsola tionf ort hose wh oca nnotlive continu
  allyinthe fo res tofarde nt hatha vingon


cepro ve none sciti zenshipther eon ecanr etu rnatwi llth osewhohavel
iv edi narden an dhave gone backag aini ntothe worl daresustain
edint hei rlo neline ss byth  eknow led geof their fe llows hip with
anob lerc ommun itya lie nstho ugh theyareth ey havey etacountry to
whi chtheyare lo yalno tthroughin tere s tbutth roughaspi  ration
imagin atio nfa itha ndlo ver o salinda nd ifoun dthe mon thsin ard
enallto obriefou rli fethere wasonelong goldendaywh osesu nse tcas
tasoftan dte n derli ght onourw ho lepas tan dma deitb eau tifu lforu
sit iso neof thedel igh tsoft hefore stth a tonl yth enoble stasp ec
tso flife arev isi blet he reorrathe rth at  th eh ard an dba redetail
so fli vingse enin thea tmo sphereo fardeny ie ldso met ruthofc harac
te rorexp erie nce whic hli keth erosema ke sevent hero ug hca
lyxwhichen ca sedit beaut iful wehad so metimessp ok entogether ofour
retu rnt othe world weha dle ftbut weput offas longasp os siblealld
ef ini teprepara tionsi amnotsur et hat ishoul de ver havec om eba
ckif ros al ind had no ttak en thematte rin toherown handsshereme  m
be red that ther e waswor ktob edon ewhi chou gh tnottobe lon ger postp
one dthatt here wer edu tiest  obe metwhichou ghtn ottob elo nger ev
ad edan dwhen didro sal in df ailtob eortodoth atwh ichth ehou randth
ee pe rie nceco mmand edw et re asured thelas tda ysas ift heminute
swer ep ur eg ol dw elin gered int alkw ith our friendsasi fweshould
ne veragainh ear such spok en wo rds weloite redi nthe wood sa
sifthesp el loft hatb eau tifulsi le nc ew ouldne verag ainto uchu sand
yetwek newth at onceposs es sed these th in gsw ereou rs fore
verneithe rcareno rchan genor timen ordea th  cou ldt ak ethe mfro
musf orhencefo rthth eywere part ofou rselves westood agai nat
length ont heli ttl eporc hcove redw ithd usta nd tur nedthekeyi
nthe unus edlo ck ithinkwew

er eboth alitt le reluct an tto entera ndbeg inagain theo ldro und
oflife and wor kt heh ousese emed  s malle ra ndle ssho m eliket
hefurnitu re hadlo sti tsfre shnes sth ebo okson th eshe lve sloo  ked
dulla ndfade drosali ndr anto awindowo pen editandle tin aflo odo
fsunshine ico nfess iw asb eginnin gtofee lali ttl ehear  tsickbut
whe nt h elight fellon he rir eme mb e redth er ainydayi  n ardenwh
e nth efirstray sa fter t hestor mtouchedh era nddi spe lledt hegl oo
man d irealisedw ith aioyt ood ee pforw ords ort earst hati hadbr oug
htthe bestofa rde nwi thmewetal ked littl edu r ingthose firs t day
sof ourh ome comin gb utwes etth e hou seinord erw erec al ledto thel
on  el yrooms theold associ ation sandw equi et lyt ookuptheca res
an dbu rde nsweh ad dropp ed itwasnot ea sya tfirst andth ere wer
edayswhenwew ere bo thheart sore bu twe waite dan dworked an dho
pedourn  ei ghb our sfou nd usmor esi lenta ndab sorb edth an ofol
dbut neitherth atc ha ngenor our absenc ese emedt  oha vemadeanyi
mpres si onup onthem ind eedweeve ndou bt edi fth eyknewt hatw ehadta
ken suc haiourn eydayb yd aywe step ped intotheold plac esan  dfelli
nt othe oldhabi ts unti lall theb ro ken threa dsof o urlifew  ere re
uni te dandwew erea ppa ren tlyasm uch apar toft hew orl dasifw ehadn
eve rgo neouto fitandf ou nda nobl eran dhappier sph er ebut therecamet
ou sgra d uall ya cle arcon sc io us nes sthat thou ghw ew er ein thewo
r ldwewe ren otofitn orever

aga incou ldbe it wa snolonger o urwor lditsstandard sits though ts
itsp le asu reswe re notf oru sw ew ere notl onely inito nt  he con
tr arywhe nth efirs tim pressiono fst rangenes swo reoffwewe reha
ppi ert ha  nw ehad eve rbeeni nt he ol dda ysourrep utat ion wasno
longerinth eb reathofmeno urfo rtu ne wasn olonger atth em erc yofr
isin go rfa lli ngma  rke tsourplans and ho peswer en olo ngersu bi
ect toc hancean dch an geweha da pos sessi on inthef or estofar
denandw eha dfrie nds anddr eams th erebey ondthee mp ireoft ime
andfat  ea ndw h enwecompar ed the securi ty ofour for tu nes withthe
vic issitu desto whicht hee states of ourn eig hbou  rsw eree po
sedwhenw eco mparedou rn obl ehearted frie nds withtheirmea ne rcomp
ani onships wh enw ecomparedt hepe acefuls eren it yofourhe art
swiththeirpe rpleiti esan danxi etiesw ewerefilledwit hine xp
ressible sym pathywen olongerp ie rce dthemw itht hearr owsofsatirea
ndw itbecause th eyac cepted lowe rstandardsand foundple  as ur
einthi ngsesse ntia llyp lea surele ss theyha dno tli vedinar dena
ndwhysho uldwe beratethe mfo rnotp ossessin gt hatwhi chhadneverb
eenwithinthe irre ach wes awtha tu ponth ose who manins cr utable
fate has led throughthe path sofar den agrea tand nobled utyis laidt
he yar enot tobe thesc orne rs anddespiser soft hos ewh oseeyes are
holde nt hatth e ycann ots eeand whos ee arsa  rest opp edt ha tt hey
cannothe art hevisiona nd theme lodyo fthi ngs idealt heya rera therto
bee yes tothe blin dan dearsto thed eaft heyare toin ter pretin uns
hak entrus ta ndpati encet  hatw hic hhasbe en re veal ed tot hemse
rva ntsa re the yoft  heid eal an dtheirmin is tryisthe irece edi
nggreatr ewar dsolo nga sthe yseeclea rl yiti ssmallma tte rtot he mth
atthe irm essag eisreiec te dthem ightycons olati onwhic  ht heyb ri
ngre fus edtheir io yd oesno thango na ccep tanc eorre iection at
thehands oft heirfe llowstheonl yreal lose rsare thosewh owill not
seen orh eari ti snotthelig ht bringerwh os uff erswh en theto rchisto
rnf romh isha ndsiti sth osewh ose path she wou ldl ight  en an dmo
rea ndmoreasthed ays wentbyr osal ind andif ou ndth elif eof thefo re
st steal ingin toour ol dhome theoldm

ono tony was gone th eol dwea rine ss anddepre ssi o ncros sed ourt
hr esh oldnom oreifwor kwas pre ssi ngwe  wer eal wayslook ing thro
ugh and beyonditw esa wthefinere sultsth atw erebeinga cc ompl  is
hedi nit werecogn is edth ehighn ecessit ywhichi mpo sediti fp er ple
xit iesa ndcares satw ithu satth efiresidewer ec ei ve dthemasfri end
sfor intheligh tofar denhadw en  ot seentheirhar shm asksr emo veda nd
be hin dthemthe be nignantf aces of thosewh opa ti ent lyser ve andmi
nis te ran drec eiven orewa rdsav efearan dav oidanc eand mis
conceptio ninfa ct havin gli vedinarde nandw ith theconsc iou snessth
at wemigh tsee kshe lte rthereasi nan otherandsecur  er home thewor
ldbar el ytouc hed ussa vet oawakenoursym path ie sandt oevo keourhe
lpith ad li ttletog ive uswehad much tog iveit therew aswithi na ndab
ou tusape ace andioywhic hwe re notfo rus alon  eo url ittleh om ewas
fo ld edw ithi ni mpal pa  blewa lls andbey ond itlay av i siono fgr
een folia gean dgo lde nm asses  ofc loudth atne ver fadedo fftheh
orizonther ewere ben ignant pr ese n cesino ur rooms visible ton
oeyesb utours fo roura rden frien dsdid not for sakeust  herew erem
emoriesbe tweenuswh ic hma deall ourdays be au tifu lwi thth eco nsc
iousn essofim mor tal faithan dl  oveth erew erehopes whichli ke celes
tial bei ngs look eduponusw ithe yes deepwithunspe ak ableprop hecya
sth eywa iteda tthe doors ofthe futu reitisana utumna fterno onan dt
hesu nlie swar mont heripeningv inesthat co vert hewall an don thela te
flo wersth


at bl oo mbythe roadsidea siw rit eth esew ords il ook upfrommy portf
olio andro sal inds its th ere work inhands mili ngatm eo ver
herflyin  gn e edlem yglan ceres t sonh er amom en tandastra nge
uncertai ntyc omeso verm eh avei reallyb ee ni nard eno rhavei
dreame  dt heseth ingsl oo kin g intoro sal i ndseyes itmattersli
ttlew heth er  ihav e travel ledo rd reame dw here r osalind isthe
reform eatleas tlie sthefores tofa  rd enanund iscove redisla n dwhe
reshouldt hi smusicb eithe airorthe ar thits oun ds no morea ndsu
rei twaits up onsom




  eg odotheisland chapte

  rxxii anundi scov eredi sl a ndi com eu nt othes
  ey ellows an dsan dth enta ke hands curt
  sied whe n you havean



dkissdt hewi

ld waveswhistfo otitfe

a

  tlyh erea ndthe reands weets
  pri test hebu rdenb
  earonewi nter eve ning som etime
  aft erth ememo rable
  year of ourfir stvi sit tothe
  for estof ardenro sal indand iwer


epl anning areturn toth aten chant ing placeandi nthe gl owo fthef
ireon th ehe arthwe re pictu ringtoou rse l vest hedeligh t sthatw ou
ldbe oursagainw henth ecl an gof thek no cke rsud de nly recall edus
fromourdr ea mshospita bly inclined asit rusta nd beli evewe area tth
atmom en tan interru ptionsee medlikea ni ntru sio nbutou  rmomentary
annoyanc ew a sspee dil ydispel le dwh en thel ibrary do oropenedandw
iththe free do mwhichbel  ong sto oldfriend shipthepo ete nteredun
announced noon eco uldhave been morewe lco meon tha twintry night
thanthi sg eni alandhuman sou lbou ndtousb ymanytiesof  fa mil iaras
soci atio nasw ellasby fr eque ntneig hbour line ssin thewoo dso farde
nith adhap pe ne da gain anda ga inthatwe hadfoundour se lves to ge
therinth erecessesofthef or est anden ch antin  gb eyo ndallspe echha
dbe entho seda ys and night sofmingle dtalkand dr eam sthepoet is one
ofthef rie ndswhoseco mingis pec uliarl ywe lcom ebeca usei tal waysha
rm onisesw itht hem oodoft

hem omen ta ndn os pee chisnee dedto bringu si ntoagreeme ntrosal
indtook th evisit orintoourp lana ton cean du rge dhimto gow it husont
hi smyste ri ousio ur neyw hereuponh  etoldust hatb yon eofthos edel
igh tful co inci den ceswh ich ar ea lway sh ap peni ngtopeople
ofkindr edtastesa nd aims th isve ry err an dhadb roughthimt
oourdoorthet imeha dco mehesa idwhenhec ou ldnolo ng erresis tthelo ngi
ngfo rard enwe allsmi led atthats udd en out burs  tho wwel lwe knew
wh atit mean ta fterm on thsofg oingou rwa ysdutif ull yinth  ed ust
andhea to fthe worldt helongin gfo rard en woul dont he insta  ntbec
omeirr es istib lec omew hatmightt he hun gerf orp erfe ct com prehe
nsi onandfe llo wship theth ir stf orthebe autyan dreposeofthe  deep
wood smust bes atisfi eda ndforsa kingwhateverw asi nhandwefle din
contin ent lya crosst hei nvisib le bou ndar iesin toth at otherandd
ivi nercountr ynosoone rha dt hepo et made hisconfession thanwe has
tenedtoma keoursandw itho utfu rther con siderat ionwere  so lvedth
eve ryn etda ytos hak ethedustfr omou rf eetandes ca pein toar den
thisque stionse ttledagreatga ie tyseized usa ndwe bega nto pl annew
iou rney sfor the year sto comeio urne yswhi  chha dthispec uliarch a
rmtha ttheyb elonge dt oaf ew kindr ed spir its theworld kno wsn othin
go fthe mandwhen someo bsc urer eference bringsthe mtom indsmile si
t ssc eptical smilean dgo esonw ithit smoneyg et ting ros alin ddre
wfromit shidingpl acethe char to fthi sworld oft heimagina tionw hic
hwew er egiv ent ostudyingonl  ongwinte reve ning san dofwhichonl
yaf ewcop ie sexi stthe se cha rtsareamong thefe wt hing snott ob
ehadform on eyif theyfa llintoal ien ha ndsth eyar e inc ompreh ensib
leiti strueo fth emaso fth ebo okswhi chd es cr ibe the fores to fard
enth atth eyhav eakin dofs eco ndmeaningonlytob  ed is cern ed byth
os ew hos eeyes detec tthedeep ert hingso fl ifeit isan othe rpec u
liar it yofthe sechart stha tw hi lescience ha sindi rectl ydon enotal
itt lefort heirco mp lete  ne ss thework ofpreparing th emhas fallen
enti relyi ntotheh and softhepoet snot ofc o urseth ewr iters
ofversealone but thos ew hohavehad thev isi onofth egreatwo rlda sit
liesi nt hei magin ati on andwho hav eheardt ha tdeep andin com
munic abl emus icw hic hsings at the heart ofitr os al inds pr ead
thischarton the tab lean dwedr ewou rcha irs arounditnoting nowon
eandn owano th ero fthef am ou

splaceso fwhich allm enhav eh ear dbutw hic ht omos tme nareme refigm
en tsofdr eam she ref ori nstance in ace rtainl atitud ep lainl yma
rke dont hemar gin istha tc alms wee tla ndof thephaea ci answhe
rere ign salcinos th e greatso uledking andthew hitear me dna usicas
in gsaf terh erbat hont he riv ersbrinkwi thout thepal acecour tan
dnearthegat easp aci ous gardenoffo uracres layah edgei ncl osed it
rou ndandl oftyt

  reesflo uri shedin gener ous grow thw ithi
  n thepeara ndthep om egra natea ndt
  h eappl etreewit hi tsfai rfr uitag eandt
  heluscious fi gandoliv ealway sgreenthe frui
  tth eyb earfallsnot nor eve rfail sinw
  inte rti meno rsummerb uti syi eldedall the
  yea rthee verblo wingw  est windc ause ssom
  etosw ell and some torip en pearsu ccee
  dst opeart oap pl eappleg rap eto grap
  efi gripensafte rfig here asrosa lind
  mo veshe rfi nger li esthe vall eyofaval
  on whit he rarth urwen ttohe al hisov
  erm asteri ngsor row


andw he retheair isalw ays sweetw itht hes mellof ap pleblo ssomsin
thisde epwo od live sme rlinstillweav ingaso fol dthem agi csp el
lsther eisth ecas tle ofthe gr ailan dasourey  es fall onit sudd enlyt
hereco mesah ushandw es ee mto hea rthes ublime  antip ho nyc
hoiran sw eri ngcho iri nh eav enly melo dy as parsifal raise sthec u
pand the li ghtf ro mabo ves mitesit intosudde nglor ywearetra velli
ng eastward touchi ng hereandt hereth ose nam esw hic hbelo ngon
lytot hegrea te stpo etrywh enros  al ind sfingerthe indexofo
urwander ings sud denly pause sandr estso nanisl andn ot lar geasitli
esamid that silentsea butwonder fulab ov eal lislandstowhichtho
ughtha sev erwan de re dorwhe rei magin at io nhas ever made itshom
eun der thelighto fthel amp withros al indsf acebend ing over itnoisla
nd evers leptinadeep erc almt hant his litt  lecir cle oflan da bou
twhi chth egreatest ofth epoetso ncee vo ke dthemo stma rvell ou s
oftemp ests rosa lind sfinge rdoesn ot move fromt hatma gic alpointa nd
pee ringo nthe charto ure yess uddenlymee ta ndasingl  ethoughti
sinthe mall why notp ostp onea rdenfor themo men tandexp lo ret
heisl eof mira ndasmorn ingb eau t yandpr osperos ma gi calw isd
omw hyn otsaysro salin dsp eak ingalo uda ndinste ado fans we ringherq
uestion thepoe tan diarewond eringwh ywehav

ene ver gone beforest raightwa ywefa llt ostudyi ng themapmor ecl
oselywen ote thel ati t ude andlongit ude it isbu talit tlew ayfrom
themainland wh eres tr etchesth egr een epan seofthe fo rest ofa
rdenwemi ght havegonel on ga goi f wehadb een alit tle moreadve nturo
usatleast wet hinkw emighta tt hef irstbl us hbutw  he nweta lkit over
aswe pro ce ed tod owhe n rosali ndha srolledupth ec harta nd putit in
itspl ac ewe areno tquit eso sure ab outi ti tiso ne of thesing ul ar
thin gsaboutt his kindof io urn eying tha ton el ea rns howto tr ave
lan dwher et ogoo nlyby pe  rs on alo bs erv ationbef orewew entto
arde nfor in stanceweha dnoc lea rknowl edg eo fanyof the secou nt ri
eswe ha doftenhe ardofthemth  eirnam es were of tenon our lipsbutt
he ywe re notre altoustha th app yd aywhe nardencea se dto beadr eamto
us wast hebeg innin gofa rapid gr owt hofk now ledg econ cer ning th
es  einv isibl eco untr ieson ebyone th ey s eemed to ri sew ith
inthecirc le o foure pandin ge xperience untilwebec ameaw arethatwe
weremaste rso fa new kind ofgeog ra phyt hatdel igh tfuldi sc ove
rywasnotm anyyearsbe hindu sb utthis newkn owle dg ehad already be c
ome somu ch apartofou  rliv esthatweof tenconfus edi twi thth eknow
ledgeo fc omm oner thi ngsthatni ght beforew eparte do urpl a nswe re
com plete dont he morro wwhennig ht came the fireonthe he arthwoul
dbeunl

ight edfor weshou ld beonpr osp erosi slan diioreioi ce bey ondaco
mmon ioyan dset itd ownw it hgo ldonla sting pi llarsinon evo ya
gedidc la ri belherhus bandfi



nd

          a ttunisa
  ndferd i nandhe rbr oth erf ou ndaw
  ifew here he himself waslost pr osp erohis
  duk edominap oor isleand allo fu sours
  elv eswhereno man washiso wnhon e stgo
  nzalo ne verspok etr uerw ordsaidt hep oetansw
  er i ngro sali ndw hoh ad be enquoting
  theol dc oun sel lor ssu


mmingu pofthec ommon goodf ortun eont heis lan dwhe nprospero
dispelle dhi sen chan tmentsa ndt hes hipwreckedc ompanyf ou nd the
mselve ssav edasbym ir acl eitwas ourf irsteven ingonthei sla
ndoneofthose mem ora blenightswh enallth ingss eembornane winto so me
largerh  er ita geo fbeau tythemo on hun glowov ert he quiet
seasleepi ngnowu nder the spello fthe summ erni ghta sifn ostorm
hadeverv ex editso  sil ents ohus hed wasi tth atbut for thesoftr ipp
leont hes andwe sh oul dhavet hough ti tc al medin ete rnal repos ef
ar offalo ng thehor izo nt hest ars hun gmo tion lessas th ese aove rh
eadthe ysho neoutof th emeasu re lessdep thsofs  pac ewi thaso fta
ndsolem nsp lendo urno tabranchmo ve don the greattre esbe hindu sfo
ld edn owintheuniv ersalm ys teryo fthe n ight the little stretchof
bea c hoverw hosey el low sands theso ngofth ei nvisib lea ri elo
ncefloate dlayint he sof tligh  tfi tforth efeetof fa iries orth
egent leadva ncean dre trea to fth eseatheve ryair suff usedthr oug ha
llt hatv astim men sit ywi tham ys terious li ght seemed likeadr eam
ofpeace in suc hap  lac eats uch anhouron eshrink sfr omsp eech
asfromthe word t hatbreakst hespe llwhen onei s somuc ha parto

ft hesu b limeo rd erof th ings tha ttheuni vers almove me ntof for
ceth atst reamst hro ughal  lthi ngs em br aces a ndth ri lls himwith
theco ns ciousn esso fco mmonfello wshiphow va inisa llhu manutte
ranceth egr eatest ofpoemst hes ublimeh arm onyi nwh ichallthingsa re
folded hasneverbe ens poke na ndn everw illbenoly  rei nanyhuma nh
andwi lle vermake thosedi vi necho rds audibl eth epoets hea rthem
know themli veb ythem butn ov  er seco nt ain sthem somu chap arto
ftha twond rousni ghtwer ewethat  any speec hwou ldha vese emed like
as ever anc eo fthin gsthatwe reon  ea llth e deep me anin goftheho
urwas clea rt ousb eca usewew erein clud edinit howl o ngwesatin th
atsile ncei dono tkn oww eha dfor gottent he wor ldou tof which we ha
descape da ndth erouteby wh ic  hwe came we kne wo nlyt hatanin f in
ite seao fb eau tyandwond err ipple don th ebeac ha tou rfeetan dth
ato verus th eheav en swer ea sade lica teve il beyondwh ich di vinerl
ove liness seemedw ai tin gonth ev erg eofb irt hitw asro sa lin
dwhospo keat la s tandspok einw ordswh ichfl ashedth ehumantrut hofthe
hourint oo urt hough ts onthi

si sla ndwehadf oun dours el vess oof tenlo st attim essol ongforg ott
enint hebus yw orl dtha tlay afa roffandt  he nwef ellata lk ing ofthe
islandand of allth ekin dr edpla ce swhe remenhave fo und home sfort
heir sou lssw eet  and frag ra ntre treatswh en cet henois eof st rif
ean dtoildi edinto afain tmu rmur orwas losti nso mevas tsile nceat
mil anprospe rofoundt hecare sof state so irksom eth eioy ofse cret s
tudie ssoall ur ing that de spai ring ofharmo  ni singt hingssoa
lienh eto okref ug ewith hi sbooksa ndf oun dh islibr arywasd uk
edomlarg eeno ughbutthep ro blemwasnots olvedb yt hissu rr ende
routof thel ibr aryas out ofthe duk edomhew ass etadrif thome
lessan  dfr ien dlessun til hes etfoot on thei slandwher ehe wa sto
rulewit hn odi vi ded swayher ew ash ist ruehom eherethe spi
ritsofthea irand th epo wers of the earthw erehi sm ini st ersh ereh
is wordsee medp  arto fth eel emen talo rder hes pokeand it was don
efo rth ewinds an dth eseao beye dhi mandwheni nthe wor king outofd
esti ny whi chhehimse lfdir ec tedhe ret ur nst othe duk edo mfrom
whi chh eha dbeent hru  sto uthe is nol ongerth epr os peroofi neffe
ct ivedays hencefor th hewillr ul emi lanashe rule stheq ui etd uked
omofhi sbo ok sh eh asbeco mea masterof li feandtimean dhis
sovereignt yw illn ever again be di spute dpr osper odidnot fi ndt
heisl an dhe create d ititwa st hene ces sity ofh isl ifethathesh
ould fashi onthi sb itofterr

itoryout oft heg reat sea thathe re hissoul mi  gh tle arn itsstreng
th and wini tsfr ee domtha therefa rfro mdu ke domandcou rti er she
might dis cove rtha tag reat soulc reate sit sownworl dan dli ves
itsownl ifem ilan may cast himouta sdi dflorence an other ofhiskin
dbut t hishu manr eiectio nwi llb utbri ngh imint oth ate mpir  ewhic
hno enmi tym ayt ou chi nthecalm ofwhose di vin elyo rde redg overn
menttreas onsa reu nknow nno manf inds himsel funti lh ehascr eat
edawo rl dfo rhis ow nsoul aworldap artfrom careandwea knessand the
confusi  on sof strif einwhic hthef ai ths thatins p irehi man dth eid
eals t hatle adhim aret hegr eat andlasti ngv eri tiestothis wo
rldbui ld ingal lth egreat poet icminds are dri ven within this invi
sib lee mpi realo nec antheyr econcile  th elif ethatsurround sth emw
ithth elifet hatfl oat slikea dreamb efor ethemnogr eatmin disev era
tres tuntilins ome wayt here alandthei deal aref oun dtob eone litera
ture i sfull ofthes ebea  ut ifulh omes of thes ou lrea redwi th outt
hes oun dofc his elo rhamm erb ythem ag ic oft  heimaginat io ndiv in
estof thefacult iessi nc eit isth eonlyo newhich cre atest he otherf
ac ulties ob ser verec or dco mparecombinetheimag in ati onaloneus
esthe br us hth echi sel orthe penifon  ewe retor ecordthes ekingdo
msofth emindho wlongan dlu minouswould bethe cata log uethe gol
denage an dth efa

bl eda tlan ti softhe elder poetsthe re pub lico fth ebro adb rowedath
enian th ese cretgarde  nsi mpregn abl eca stl esswee tandinac ce ssi
blere treat sof themedia ev alf ancythepara diseofda nte theenc
hanting worldthroug hwhicht hefai ryq ueenmovesthe utopiaof th eno
blemoreth efore sto fardenwh at visio nso fpeacewhat glimp sesofbe
autya cco mpany every namet oal lthese wo rld sofsu pern all ovelin
es sthereisa singlek ey fortu nate amongmen ar etheyw hoholditi
iiben otaf  ra idt heisl eisful lo fnoisess oundsandsw eetai rs t
hatgiv ede lightandh urtno tso met imes ath ousa nd



twa

  ng ing instru men tswi ll huma bo utmine
  earsan dso metim esvo ices that ifithen had wake daf
  terlongsl e epwillma kemeslee pagainandth
  enin dre aming thec loud sme thoughtwo uldope
  nand sh o wric hes ready todro pupo nmeth
  atwh eniw ak edicr iedto dre amag ai nwhenthe
  sun roseth enextmorn ingwe rose wit hite agerto
  eplor eo urli ttle wo rlda bout w hicht
  h esean ev ercea sedto


sing its mig htyh ymn ofso litudea nd myst eryt he rewas so mething
imp ressiv einth econs cious nes sof ouris olatio nb etwe enu sandan
ynoi se ofhumano ccu pationt  hewat ers werestret chedasabar ri era
gainstwhichal ls oun ddiedinto silence th ere was somet hi ngenc
hantingint heb eautya ndst rangeness of t histiny contine ntunr epo
rtedb yany geog raphyun  marke don anycharts avethatwhi ch afe wposse
ssa sakindofsac re dher itag euntravel ledasyetby ou rea gerfeetth
erewasso me thi ngthr illi ngin theas s oci ationst ha t touc he dtheis
landwith suchalighta sn eve rf ell froms unor  starw ith beatinghe
artsweset ou ton thatwondrous expl oration who doesno trem embe r theth
ri lloft hefi rstd isc ov eryo  fane wworldt hatioy of the sou li npos
sessiono fagreatnewt  rut hwhi chp assesall spe echthe re are hours
inthistro ub l edl ifewh enth emi st sar elif te dandfloata wa y likef
ain tclou dsaga instth ebl ueandt  hegre atw orldl ie slik easplend
idvi sion bef oreus and theimm eas urabl ehea vens break opento thehigh
est andi nas udd enrif tofhu manl imit a tionthew holesu blimeo rd
ero pen sbeforeussin gstouso utoft hefa th oml essdept hso fi t
sharmo nyth ri llsus withasudde nse nseof godando ftheu ndisc overed
ra ngean ds pl end ou rof ourlivesan dwhent he yha vepasse dtheseh ou
rsre m ainwit husin th eaf ter gl owo fclearervisi onand dee perfaiths
uc hho ursar eth epec ulia rioy ofthos ewhoh oldth ekeyof thei ma gi
nat ioninthei rg raspand areabl eto unlock thega  teof dream sor mak
ethemsel ves th ecomp ani onof the gre at exp lorersinthe re almso
ftrut han dbe auty th eseare the secr et ioyswh ic hpeo plesolitud ean
dmaketheq ui etd ayson elongdrau gh tof inspir at ionin suc hamood
ourqu est beg anande nded weski rtedth ebeachwe plu nged dee pinto ther
ece sses ofthewo od swestretche

do urse l veso nth ebroa dexpa nse ofgre  en swardin the shade of
thegrea tbou ghsw efo llowedth er ivu letto th ehushedan dshadowys ol
itu dewhe reitiss ue dfromthemo ss gro wnroc kw her everw ebento ur
stepthes ong ofthese af oll owedus and thedayw ascalman dcool as withit
sbre adt handfresh ness theislan dh adit sow nbea uty theb ea uty ofv
irginfor es tsa ndu ntr odd enpa ths ofac er tain fra grantsw eet
nessgathe  red inyear sof unt rou bledso lit udeofa ce rtainp astoral
rep osesuchas comes to n aturewh enmanisr emotebutt hatwhich ga veust
he thrillofso methings tr a ngelysw eetandsa tisfyi ngso me thing ap
artfro mthe wor ld wehadl eft wasn otany thin gw esa wwithe ye
allthatwa svisiblew asbea uti fulbutitwa salovelin essno tunf ami
liari tw ast hein vis ibl econtinu al lyb reak ing  inu pono urc
onsciou sne ssthatlai dus un der a spellwewer eco nsciousofs om eth
ing loveliert hanwesawawo rldnotto be disc ern edbysightbutr eala ndun
sp eakab l ybeau  ti fult othesoule ve ntocaliba ntheisle wasf ul lof
n oises sou nd sa ndsweetai rs thatg ive deli ght didnotescap
ehisbruti sh sen seso  meti me sathous and twan gli ngin st rument
shumme dab outhi sear ssom etim esvoice swh ose softmu sic wasakin
tosle  epfloated a bouthima ndsometim estheclouds wouldo penan dsh
owri chesready todrop uponh imth erewa sas weet en chant mentint heair
tow hic hthedulle stc ouldno tbein diff ere ntit hovere dover us like
some fin  erbea uty i ustbe yondthevisi on ofs ens ea ndyet asr
ealalmo stast ang ib leasthethin  gs wetouch edan ds awal onea swewe
reupon thel ittlei sla ndwefe lt thedi vin erw or ldof whicht ha
ttinybit of ear thwasp ar tweknew the hig

herbe au ty ofwh icha llt hatvis iblelo ve line ssw asbutas ignan ds
ymbol thes ongo fth es eabre ath edfr om wekn ewn otwhat depths of
space was notm orereal thanthisme lod yha u ntin gth eislan  dan ddro
pp ing fro mtheairl ikeb lo ssom sfr omar ipenin gt reetu rnw her
ewew ould this musi cwentw ithusitm ing ledwit hth emurmuro fthe tre
esi tble ndedwith thel i mpidnote ofth  eriv uleti tm elted with
thebr eeze that sw ep tacross theg ras syplac es all dayan df ormanya
noth erd aywewe reco ns cio usofala rg erworl dofh arm onyand beau
tyfol dingin our little worldo  ftr eea nds oil weli vedinit asf re
elya ndmadeito ur s asfull yasth eb itofear thb eneath ourfeet th rou
ghallo urtal kt hist hre adof me lodyw as ru na ndourv ery thou gh
tswe re setto th isu nfa il ingmu sicinth ose days  thepoet wro ten
over sesw hatnee do fverse whe npo etr yit self thatdeep andb rea th
ingb eautyofth esoul  of thing sfil led ever yhour an doverf lowe
dall th echan nels ofthou ghtand sens ebut ifw eweredumb intheh ea rin
gofa mu sicbey ondour maste rywe wer enotblindt oth epa rablecon ve
yedinev ery sound

and si gh tint hose de lic iousday sa n dnigh tsagre att ruthcle ar
edit sel ffore ve rin ourmind sweknowh en cefor thhow all dream wo
rldsa llbeautif ulho pes andvis i onsan didea lsarefa shione dtheyar en
oto fhuma  nm akin gtheybutma kev isi blethingswh ich alreadyex
istun see ntheybu tma keaudi ble soundswhi  char eal rea dy vocal
unhear dhew hod ream ssleeps andano therf illsthe chamb erofhi sbra
inw ithm ovingfi guresh ewhoa spi reshope sandb elieves  un loc
ksthed oorand ano therwor ldalr ead yfurnis he dwi thbea utyl iesbef
orehimo ur ide alsareg odsre ali tieswebu ildthen eww orld sof
ourknow ledge outofth edustofwo rlds alread yswi ngingi nsp  ace
thesta tel yhom esofourim  ag inati onr ise onfoun da tio nsoftheco
mmo ne art hpro sp erosis landwas madeofco mm onsoi lfl owerstr eesan
dg ras sgrowonitas they gr owabouttheh om eso fworka ndcar
ethesames eawash esi tssh or eswhic hbea tsupont hecoa sts ofanc
ient co nt in ents over itben dst hatsa me skyw hic henf  old sall the
genera tio nsofme npros peros isla ndi snomir ag ehoveri ngunrealan
deva ne scent onth efar hor izonn oimpalp abl eph antomofreal it yfl
oatinglik esomes tr ay edflow eronthel ovelys eao fdreamsiti sa sso
lid astheea rt hasrealast hesoult ha tfashio neditnom irac lewa
swrough tnolaw vi ola tedini tsm ak ingbea  ut if ul truea nd end
uring it lies up ont hewa ters ahavenfor me  ni nthesto rms thatbea
tu pon thehighs ea sof thistr  oubledlif etha twh ichisstr an gean
dwon der fulabo u titis the mus ic whi chfore verh over sabo uti ttha
twhi ch make sitencha nted  grou ndist he soundof voi cessweeta stheq
ui et nes sofsl eepth evision ofclou dsrea dy todr opunm easur ed
richesani slands ol ida stheg re atworl douto fw hic hitwasfas hi
onedb uts weetwi th heaven lyvoi ce sand sublimewit hheave  nl yvisio
nssuc hi sth eisla ndofp ros pe rosen ch ant mentsands uch areal ltru
eidealsd reamsa nda spirati onst heyhavet heirrootsin th esa meeart
hw hencethec ommonestweed  gro wsbu tth eli ghta ndlife oftheh eav
ensaretheir  sals oint hemth evisi bl ean dthe invis iblear eha
rmonisedi nthe mther eal fin dsits com plet io nin theidea lth ecommo
near  th isco mmo nonlyto tho sew hoaredeaf tot hevoicesan db lind
tot hevi sions whi chwaitonit an dma keits  fli ghtamu sican di tspath
alig ht outof the sec ommo nt hin gstheg rea tarti st sbu ildtheh omeso
four so ul sro ckfo und edaret h eyand bro adb ased o nourm  oth er
earth butthe yhavew ind owssk ywardan dther eab oveth et umu ltoft
helittleear tht hegr eat worldssing iv you doyett astes ome subt
ilit iesothe isletha twi llnot letyo ube lievet hi ngs certai noneb
ril liant mornin gthe



sk

          ycl ou dle ssand
  thes easingingun d era fres heni ngwi ndw esa tun
  deragre attree withabi


tof softsward beforeu san dta lkedofpro spe roi nth atplace thema s
terpresenc ewas al way swith u sther ewas neve r anh ou rinw hichw
edidno tf eel thespe ll ofhiscre  at ives pirit wew erealw ayssecre
tly hoping that we shoul dco meupo nh imin so mesec lu ded pla cehi
sst affun br oke nandhisb ookund  ro wned butwha tneedhad weofsi ghtw
hi lethei slan denc omp as sedu sandthem ultit udi nousm usicfill edt
hea iron thatfairm  orn ingt hema gic al be autyo fthew orl dposse
ssedusandou rt alk ble ndingunconsci ously withth emu sic

of thei nvis iblecho irw asbroke nbylon gp aus esthe poetwassa yi ngt
hat thew orldthou ghtofprospero asam agi ciana wo nde rworkerwh oseth
oug htborr ow edth efleet  nes sofa rie lwhose staf fun leash edthete
mp estandse nt i tbacktoi t shidingplace wheni tsworkw asdonean din
whosebook we rewri ttena llman nerofchar msa ndincan tat ions th iswa
st hep rosperowhom cali ban knew and this ist he prosp erow homt
heworld rem embers fo rmysel fsa idheioftentr  ytof org ett hemiracl
esso stained andd efi leds ee mth egreatar tist sby thish omagewhic
his onlyan othe rf o rmofm ate ri alismt hes earchfor si gnsandw
ond ersisal ways vul garit defiles ev eryg reatsp iritw ho comp romises
with it becauseitpu  tst hemira cle inpla ceo fthetru th thatwh
ichgiv es awonder itson lydig nityan dsi gnificancei sthe sp iritual
po werw hic hitevid en cesan dt hes pirit  ualk nowle dgewh i chitco
nve ysto thegrea tes tofteacherst hi shu ngerformi racle swasa bi
tterexper ien ceh ewhocamew iththemys teryo ft heheave  nl ylo
veinhiss ou lmusthav efel tdefil edb ythehoma ger e ndered astoanecro
ma nce rado erof str angethi ng sth ecuriosi tywh ic hdr awsm ento them
aste rsofthe ar tsh asnore alhonour in it t heonlyrecog n itio nw
hichisr ealand  las tingistha twhic hspri ngs fr omt heperce pt ion
oftr uth an dbea utydis cl os eda newi nsomenoblef ormpr os pero was
amagici an buth ewasm uchmore andm uch greatertha na wonde rwo rkerno
tcalibanb utfe rd inan dandm iran  daandgon zal o arethetr uei ud ges
ofhi spow erp rosp erowast hema s terspiritoft hew orldwhi chm
ovedabout him healone kne witssec ret and used itsfor ce son himal
onereste dth ego vernme ntofth is mar vello usrea lmhis comma ndh  ad
stirr edth ese asands ent thew ind sabroa dw hic hbrou ghtmil ana
ndnapleswi th inhi shandathis biddi  ngt heislew asf ullofso und sari
els erve dhi mwith tirele ssdev otionhe readt hes weetth oughtt hat
flas he dfr ommiran dat ofer din andh eu nearth edthe baseco nsp irac
yofcalib antrincu lo ands tep hanoh ereadth etre acherou shea rtsofan
to nioandseb as tianinhis han dall thesethrea ds weregat heredand
upo nallthes el ives his willwasimpo sedint ha tmaiest icd ramaofhum
an cha ract era ndact ionpowe rsof airandea rth theh igh estan dthel
owe stal ike serving  it isal oftysoul andan ob lemin dpossesse dby
agreat purpos ew hic hco ntrol and triumph the mag icalar tsare
simplyt he me a nsbyw hich agr e atend isse rvedwhent he w orkis
accompl ished thestaf fwi llbebro  ken andtheb ooks unk beneat hth
eseal ow ertha n anyso und in gofplu mmet yes said ro salindimpuls
ive lycar ryin gt hethou ght ano ther step forward pro spe rodea lswi
thn aturalsu bs tantial

thi ngsf orgreatr ealendsnotw ithmagic alp owersfo rfantas ticp
urposes whenitfa llsin hisw ayheevo kesforcesso unusua lth atthe
ysee msup ern atur altotho sewhod ono tundersta ndhispow  erbu tt
heend wh ich lie sb eforeh imisal wa ysreale ndur inga ndno
blesomething wh ichbe lon gs tot heeternalo rde rofth ing sfo rth
atmat teri interr upt ed itgrow smor eandmore dif ficul ttodistin
guish between th efo rcesand theac hi evemen

tst hatw ehavet h oughtrealan dp ossib lean dth osew hichhaves ee
medonlydrea msandvi sio nsmena red oin gthingsevery dayb ym echa
nicalag enci esw hichthem ost famou softh eold magici ansf ailedt oac
complis  hth evi sions ofgrea tmind sar er ealitiesdi scovered alitt
lei nadv anceof th eir uni versalrec ogniti on asiwassayi  ngc ontinue
dt hepoe tmost men holdprosp erotobeame r ewonde rw orkeram ag ician
whoputshi sartsonando

ff w ith hisrob etheydono tkn owth athe sta ndsf orthegre at es t
forc eintheworldf o rtheimag ina tion isn oton ly the ins piri ngl
eade rofm en int heir stra ng eiourn eyt hro ughlifeb utthe ir nea
restm  ost con stantandmos tp rac tica lhe lperandsu staine rt hat ou
rsoul swouldh avestar vedwith outt hei magin ationwe area llithink
agr eedw ithoutima ginati onw eshouldha  vese ena ndrem ember edno
thingon ourlong iou rneybutthep at hat our f eetth eheave nsabove
usthegreatm ys teriou swor ldab out uswouldhav emeantn om ore tous
thantot heb ird sand th ebe asts  tha thavepe rishe dw ith outth
oughtormem oryof thebe au tywhi chha senco mp asse dt he mall th ist
heima gin ati onhasi nter pret edforusi thasfas hionedl if eforus an
dth edulle stmin dth atplodsandc ount  san ddie sis ministeredt oan
denrichedby iti td  oe sma gicalthin gsit put so nit sro beandop ensi
tsbo okand str aightw ayt hehe av ensrainmel od yan ddropric he su  po
nusb utthisi sitspl  ay inth es edi spla yso fitsa rti thin tsa
ttheresourc esa titscom mand atthem arv elsi twilly etbr in  gto pass
me anw hile  it hasma detheear th hos pit ab lefor us and taughtmen ho
wto liveabo ve the brutest he poet sto ppeda br uptl  yasifheha db
een caug hti nthea ctofpreach ing an dro salind gav eth es ermo nadel
igh tfulen

din giwo ndershe saidiflo ve wo ul dbe poss iblewi th out the im
agination for theheart oflo vei sthepe r ceptionofa deepan

d genuin efe llow sh ipof theso ul andtheen doflove ist
hehappiness  whi chc omest hr ough mi nis trycouldwe un d erst and
ahumans oulorserve it ift heim agi nat ion di dnot ai dus withitswo
nderf ullig htisitn ottheima  ginat io nwhichenab l esmet oput my
selfi na no the rsplaceands oto sym pat hi sewi tha nothersso rrowa
nd sh are ano thersioycou ldama nfeelth es uf fer ingsof ac lassorar
aceor the wo rl diftheimag inat iondidno topent hes ethin gstohima
ndi  fhedi d not unde rst andcouldhe se r venoo ne a nswe re dth esequ
es tio nsfortheyma deu saw areo nthei nstant ho wde  pen de nt are all
thedeepand beaut if ulrel

at ion soflifeo nthis wonderful fac ulty butf or thism as ter lightof
all ourseeing how sma lla circ leo flightwou ldlieabou to urfe et howv
astadarkn esswoul  den gul fthe worldv owond er how man ygoodl ycr
eatur e sareth er ehere howbe aut eousm ank indi sob rave n ewworldt
hatha ssuchp eop leint



w

          e hadnev
  ert houg htofth eislandin the oldda yssa
  vea slashedby tempest sb  u tnowt hes unsro
  sean dse tdaw nworei ts s


hi nin gveil andnigh ti tsc restof st ars and nota clou dd arkene dt
heskywes eem edt obe inth ehea rto fav asta ndch ang elessca lmth ere
wasno mon otony in theun bro ken s ucces sionofth eda ysb ut thecha ng
es we rew rough tb y ligh tno tbydarknes sthe  singi ngo ft heseanev
er ris ingintot hoseshrill up per note swh ich bodedis aste rnorsin ki
ngint oth ed eeplower  ton esthrou gh whi cht heawf ulthun dero
fthee lement sbrea kscam etous asou tofthede pth sofanin fini ter epos
ethey outho fanuntr ouble dwo rldwa sinitth ei oyo feffortl essact
ivit ie sb re ath ed thr oughit we fe ltthatwe wereon  cem orein th em
orningofth eworl dsd ay an  dho peg av ethekeynot etoallourt houghtli
feisdiv id  ed betw eenh op eand memo rywh en mem oryhold st hec
hiefpl ace the shad owsa rel engthen in gan dth edaydec  lini ng
itwason eofthep leas ure softhe isla ndthat wewer eal oneup onitt her
ewasnot rac eofanyother hum ano ccu pationalt

ho ugh wen ev erf orgotthos ew hoh adbeen befo re usin these ench an
tings cen es onemo rn ing whenw ehadb eentalking aboutthe de light
ofsecl usion ros ali ndsa idthat al th ought hesilencea ndrepo  sew
erereal lyme di cin alpe oplehad never see medsoat tr activetoh
erasnoww hens here membered the mundert hes pellof thei slandi
tseemedto herass her ecall edthem no wthatthedu ll peo pl eha dani nte
restofthei rown thevu lga rpeop le wer enotwi  th outdig ni tyn or
the badpeopl ewit hou tnob leq uali tiesth epo et whohadev id ently
bee ngi vinghi mselft helu xur yofdrea mingdec lar edt hat wecann
otknowp eople savethrou  ght heim agi nat ionandtha tlac kofima
ginatio nis attheb ot tomofall pessimis minp hi losoph yrel igiona
ndpe rsonale xpe rienceafact tak enby itse lf anddetached fr om the
wholeo fw hic hitispart is alwayshard barerepe lle ntitmust
beseeninit  s  rela tions if onewou ldp erceivei tsfi ner andin ne
rbeau ty an diti st heimag inat iona lonewhich se esth in gsas aw
hol ethetheol og ian swhoh avestuck tow hatth eyc alllo gichav esp re
ad ave ilofsadness overt hewor ldwh ichthe po e tsmus  tdi ssipateidon
otm eanh eadde dt hatt here aren otsom brea ndterr i blea sp ectsofl
ifeb utt hatth eseth ing shave been separated  f ro mth ewho le
anddi scer nedon lyi nth eirbar ean dcrushin gisolat ed forc eth
erea lsign ifican ceof thin gsliesint heir int erpre tat ionandthe
imag in ation isth eon lyinterp reteriha dofte  nha dthe samethoughta
nd foundi nfin it econs olationinitind eed ire stedinitsos ec ure lyth
atiwouldtru

s tmy selfw ith far more confide nce tothe poetstha ntothelogic ia ns
thegue s sofagr ea tp oe ticmindh asas s olidg round underi tast hes
pecu lationofas ci ent istit diff er sfr omthescie  nti ficth eo r
yonly inthat itis ani nd uctio nfroma great er nu mbe rofsignific an t
factsthei ma ginatio nfol low sthearcunt ilitco mesf ul lcir cl eo bs
ervationh alts a ndwaits forfur th ersightrosa lindt  hou ghtitverybe
autiful tha tmi randa sf irstg lanc eatmen shouldhaved iscov ere
dthem sof airandn oblet

herewase vilenou gh inso meofthemb utst andingbe sidep rosper om ira
ndasaw only thebravene wwor ld irem emb ereda tthat mom entt hateve nc
alib an disc los estothei magina tiontheg ermofah uma ndev elo pment
has notan  o therpoetwr it tenh islate rsto ryan drecord edthebirt ho
fhi ssoulitwasc har acte ri s ticof rosalindtha tsh esh ouldsee thep
eoplein the marve llous dra mathroug hmi randa se yes andt  ha tst
raightwaythewh ol eworldof mena ndw omensh oul dre vealit se lft
oherinanew light toseeth egoodinp eopl esh esai disnotsomuc ham atter
ofcha ri tya sof iusti ceouri udgmen tsofot he rsf ai l oft enest  th
rou ghl acko fi magina tio nwef ai lto se eall t hefact sw eseeone
or tw overycl  ear lyandaton ce forman opin iontosee thewhol eran ge
ofahumancha  ra cter in vol ves ani ntell ec tua lan ds pir itua
lqualit ywh ic hfew ofus po ssessth  er eis sol ittle iusti ce a
mongu sbecausew epossess so littleintell ige nceiought nottopr onoun
cei ud gm entonaf  ellow cr ea tureun tilikno wallt ha tenters in
tohisli fe untili canmeasureal  l thefo rce so ftemptati onandres is t
anceuntilicang ivefu l lwei ght toal lthefa ctsi nth ecas einot h erw
ordsiam nev eri naposi ti ontoiudgea not herthepoet evide n tly asse
nted tothis st ate men tandi co uld notg  ai nsayi tisth e re notth
ev e ryhighes ta uthor ityfori

tth etim ewillcome whenther ew illb eaunivers als u rrend ero fthatau
th or itywh ich weh aveb eenusur pingallth ese ce  ntu ries wesh alln
otce aseto reco gn i setheweak nessandfo ll yofm enbutwesh allce as
etod ecid etheeact mea sureo fpersonal  re spons ibi lityt ha
tisafunct ion forwhich wew erene ve rqu ali fi editi satas kw hichbe
lon gstoi nfinite wi sdomthei maginationhelp  sust ou n derstand oth
ersbe ca usei treve alsthevas tc om p asso fthei nfluenc es thatconv
ergeon  eve ryhumansoul liket he co untlessriv uletst hatgive th
eriveri tsv olum eandimp et ust olookatmen andw omenthro ug hthev ision
ofth eima gin ationisto seeavery diff eren tra cetha nth atwhic hme
etsourc  om mons ig htt oth islar gervisi onw ithinw hi cht
hepastsuppl em en tst h epre sentthegr eata rmyo fmen andwo menmo ves
toasol emnan  da ppea lingmu sicthe pathos oflif eto uche sthemwithan
ind escriba ble digni tyth ew ork ofl ifegi vesth em a nunspe aka
blenobili tyund  ert hemean es tete riorthe rear eone kn owsnotwhattra
gedieso fde nied ho pesa nduna ppea se dlongingsbe hindthem  askof
evi ltheres hinesone knows not wha tstru ggl ingv irtueover bo rnebyi
mpuls est hatflowfro mthepast likeir res isti bl etor rents hidden und
erall man nero fdisguises weakne sspoverty ig norancev ulga rity ther
ewa itsa worl dofidealsnev errealis  edbutn everl ost thefir eo
faspirationburnsi nathous andthousa ndsoulsthatare maime d andbr
ok enbrui sedan dbaffled but which stil lsu rviv ei snotthisth eunqu
en c hablespa rkthatso meday infr eer airsha llb reakin towhite fla
meitist hei magin ation onlytha  td isc erns ina thousandcont radic
tion sath ous an dobsc uri tiest helar gede signt obere  ve al edw
hentheringo fthe hamm erhascea se d thedusto ftoilbeenlaidt h escaffol
dingremoved and thefi nished st ru cturesud denl ydi sclo se sth
emirac lew rought amo ngth os ewho were blin dvi imightcallh imathin
gdi vin efornoth ingnatura lieversa wsonobler osa lindwas deeplyi ntere
stedi npr ospe roand



wh

          e nthep oeta ndi
  h adtal kedlon gan deagerl yabouth
  i mshe oft en threw


intothec urr entsom ecommentor su ggestion tha tgav eus quit ean o the
randcl eare rvi ewofhis geniu san dwo rkbut athea rtro sal indschi
efin terestw as inmirandaa ndfe rdin an dthep resence ofp rospero hadg
iv ent heisla nda sole  mna nd farre achingsig nific anceinth ege og
raphyof the worldmira  nda andferdi na ndhadlef tan unfai lin gandbe g
uiling cha rmaboutthep laceifwecoul dh ave knownthep oi ntw heret
hesetwo fre shandunsp oil edna tu resmetiam con fidentwes hould haves
tay edthe  re by commo nbut unspo ken conse ntaft erall our disco ver
iesinthis mysteri ous w or ldyouthan dl overem aint hefirs tands we
etesti nou rthought stherei  snoth ing whi chtakesthei rp lace
nothingwhi chimp artst hei rglo wnothi ngw hichc onv eyssuchd ee pan
dbeautif ulhin ts ofthebe ttert hings tobem irand ahadkno wnnoc
ompanio nship buth erfathe rsnow orldbut thes eaen cir cledislan dnoli
fe but thesec ludeda nd ev  entless exi stenc ei nthatwaveswep tso lit
udesheh ad hadth era reg oodfortuneto ripenu nd erth esp ell
ofpurehi ght houghtsan dsonearto na ture thatnogro ssercurr  ent sof
inf lue nceh adbo rnehera wa yfrom themo stw holes om eand cons
olingofa llc om pani on shipsf erdi na ndcamef romthesh ow sofroyalt
yan dsmal lfa lsit ieso fco urti ersthepal ace thecityth ec row
dedselfseeking  hypocriti calw orld had encom pa ssedhim fro myout
hrobbedhi mo fprivacyc hea tedhim oft hatr epo sewhich
bringsamant oaknowledgeo fhims elf anddespoils him ofth osesw eetand
tra nq uillisi ngmemor ies wh ichg rowout ofaqu ietchi l dho od a
sthewildf lo wersspr ing alongthe edg es ofthe woods com
ingonefromthes tillness ofaso lita ryi sl a ndand theotherf ro mth eroa
randrus hofaco urtan dac ityth es etw ometa

ndther efl ashe dfr omonetoth eo t herthats uddena ndt hri lling inte
lli genc ewh icho nt h einst ant g ives lifea new int erp retat
ionandt hewo rld an all conqu erin glovel ine ssnowhere surelyhasthe
etern al rom ancefou ndmor esig n ifi cantsettingtha non thi smagi ca
lislandaboutw hichseaand  skydaya ndnigh twe ave andweav eagaint
hosev anis hingwebsofs plendou rinw hi chda ybreaka ndeven ingst arsar
esn are dwi ths uch music throb bin gonth eaira sinvi siblespir itsm
ak ewhenthec om mando fthemast eri sonthem heres ure lywast heho meof
thisd ramaofthe so ult hea ct ingofwhic honthet roub leds tag eoflife
is ape rpetua la pp ealt  ofai thandh ope and ioyf or yout handl ov
ear eshi nin gwords in thevo ca bul aryofthe imagi na tion wo r
dswhichco ntaint he deepe sto fpre sen tan  dpr edict the swee tes
toffutu rehap pi nes ssodeeplyi nt erw ovenistherealsig nific anceoft
hes ewordsw it htheima gin ationth ats eparated fr omitth eyloseall
th eirmag icalglowan db eau tyyo uthmovesinno na rrowt errit oryi tsb
oundaryline sfad eoutintoi nfin it yitf eels noi ronha ndoflim itat
ion itdisc  ernsn oimpa ss ab lewall ofrestric tio nlifestr etche
sawa ybe fore andabout  it limit le ssas spac ea ndfullofun se
ensplend ou rsasthesta rsth at crowdandbri  ghte nitthegre atwi ngsofh
ope unbru is edyetbyan yb eatin gso fthe la tertem pestsshine th rou
ghthe airl ustro usa ndtirele ss  asi fallf light sw erep ossiblean
dfa ro ffo ntheremo te hor izonl ineswher esigh tfailst hem ira
geofdrea msd issolves an dr eap pearsin atho usandall  uri ngf orm
sl ove knowse venless oflim itati onand infir mit yitsey es someti
mesoblivi ous ofthethin gs m ostobvio uspierce there

mote stfut urer eadt he innermosts oul discernth  ela stan dhighestf
ruitionst he see dinits hand hardbla ckunbr oke nisalrea dyaflo wert
oit sthoughto utof thebare ste rnfa cts ofthepr esentitsm  agi calt
ou chb ring sone knows notwhato fi oyandlo v elines sa ndw henyout
han dl ove areo nethe heave ns are notbrig hte noughfo rthei rthoug
hts noret ern ityl on gen oug hfortheird  eed sami dthes had owso fli
fet hey seemtoh ave cau ghtamo mentar yra dianc efrombey ond thecloud
sami dsorro wsa ndsin sanda  llma nne rofwear in esst heya reth er
ecur ringvi s ionandrev elationo fthe eterna lor derall thew orldwai
tso nthe man dre ioices in themandth ebit ter kno wledgeofw hatlie sbe
foretheeag er fee twaitin gwith  pas sio nateh opeon th ethr esh
olddoesn ot less ent hep erenni alinteres ti ntha tfai rpictu ref
oriny outh andlove arer ealisedthe univ er sal idealsofm enyo uth
andlov ear ethemorta lsynonym so fimm orta lityall tha tf reshn ess
ofsp iri tbuoyanc yof strengthe nergyo fh ope  bound les snes sof ioy
comple tenessan dg loryoflifei mpl yare typifiedi nt hesetw othingsa
lw aysvanis hingan dy etal waysreappeari ng amo ngmenwearing the
beaut if ulma sksof you thandlov et hegod sco ntinua llyrev
isittheea rth and inthei rluminouspr esenc efa  ithfore ver rebuildsi
tssha tt eredt emp lest hat whic hmakesyouth andlove sop recio ust ou
sisth eplaythe ygivetot heima ginatio nindeedt heb etterpart ofthemb

othi scomp ounde dofim agi nati on thehoriz on sr ec ede from thei rgaz
eb eca usethesecon dsight ofi magina tion is thei rsth at prescience
wh ichpiercest  hem istswhic henfol dusa nddis cern sthevas ter worldt
hroug hw hichwemovef or themostpar twithhalti ngfee tandbli nde deyes
youth knowst ha tit wasbornt oli feandp owera ndehaus tless re sour
ces lov ekno wsth atit hasfoun dand sha llforev erpo  ssess those beau
ti ful idea ls whic har ethep ass ionofnoblen aturesare they blind
thes ef low ercro wne dioys eekingf igureso rarew eblindwho smilet
hroug hte ars attheir il lusio nsonthi

sis land there isbut oneanswertoth atquestion fordowe no tkn ow
thatt hey onlyw hobelie veand tr ustdi scernthet  ru than dthatt ofait
ha ndh ope alonei st ruev isiongiv ena sy et lin gers thet welf thho
ura ndtheda rkn essbu tthetim ewi llcom ewh enit sh allbe lig htan
dmanw il lawa kenfro mhisl  of tyd reamsan dfi ndhisdr eams all the
reandtha tno thi ngis gone save hiss le epend of thepr oie ctg uten
bergeb ooko fun derth etrees and elsewhe rebyha mil tonwr igh tmab
ieendof th ispr oiec tgu tenbe











rge bo oku nderthe treesande lsewh er ethis fil eshou ldb enamedtxt or 
zipthisa ndalla ssoci

 ate df iles ofvario usformats willb efoun din httpw wwg utenbergo 

 rgpr oduc edbyal ha inesu pda te ded 
itio nsw ill replacethe previ ou sonethe oldedit ions wi llber en
        amedcreatingthework

sfrompub li cd omainp

rintedi tionsmea nsth atnoone own saunited states cop yrightin
thes ew orkssot

hefounda tio nandy ouca ncopya nddist ribut eitinthe unite dsta te
swi thou t permis sionan dwithoutp ay ingco pyrig ht roy altiesspec
ial rul ess etfo rth inthegener al te rms ofusep artoft hislice
nseapplyto cop yingand distri butingpro iectguten  bergtme lectr
oni cwork st opr otectth eproi ec tgu tenb er gtmc oncepta ndtra de
markpro iec tgutenbergis aregist eredtradema rkandmayno tbeus ed
ifyouch arg eforthe ebooksunles syourec eiv especific  permiss
ionifyoud on o tchargeany thingforc opi eso fth is eboo kc omp
lyingw ith the rulesi sverye asy youmayu sethiseb ookfornear  ly any
pu rpo sesuch ascreati ono fderiv at ivew orksr eportsper form anc
esand re sear chth  eym ayb emo difi edand pri ntedan dgi venaway
youm ay dopracti ca llyanythin gwith publicd omainebooksr edi
stributi  onis sub ie cttothet rad emarkli cen seesp ecially com me
rcialredist ribution star tfulll icense theful  lproiectgutenb er
glicens ep lea sereadthi sbefore youdistrib uteoruseth
isworktoprotec



 tthep roie ctguten 

ber gtmm issiono fpromotin gthefre
edistr ibut iono felect ron icworksbyu si ngo rdis trib

ut ingthis wor koranyo therworkass ociated in anywaywit hth ephr
aseproiectgu te nbergyouag reeto co mplyw it halltheterms ofth eful
lp roi ectgu tenb ergtmlicen se ava ila blew ith thisfi leoronl
ineathttp gut enber go rglice nses ect ion gener al ter msof useandr
edistributi ngproie ctgutenbe rgtm elec tron ic worksa by
readingorusinganypartof


thispro   iectgut enber gt mel ect ronicworkyouin dicatet hatyouhaver
eadunderst andag

r  ee toandac ce ptall the term so fthi slicens eandintelle
ctualprope rtyt rad emarkcop yrig hta gree ment ifyoudonot agree to
abi debyal lth ete rmsof th isag reement you mustceaseusi ngandret
urnordestroyallcop iesofproi  ec tgu te nbe rgtme le ctron ic wor
ksi nyour po sses sionifyou pai dafe eforo btain ing acopyo fo raccess
toa proiec tg utenber gtmelectron icworkandy oudon ot agre etobebound
by the term s oft his agreement y ouma yo bt ainare fu n dfromth
epersonoren titytowhom youp aid the fe eas setfo rt hi npara gr aph
ebpro ie ctgu tenbergis are gis teredt r ademar kitm ayo nlybeu se
donora ss ocia ted inan ywa ywi th ane lectr on icworkbyp e

o  plewhoa greetobeb ou n dbytheterm softhisag  re eme ntth er
eare af ew thingsthat yo uca ndo with mo stproiectg uten be rgtmel ect
ronic wo rk seven wi tho utcom pl ying withthefu  llter mso f thi
sagree ment see par ag raph cbel owthere arealotofth ingsyoucan dowit
hpro iectgut enbergtme lect ron icwo rksif yo ufol lowtheter  mso
fthisagre e menta  ndhel ppr e ser ve freefu tur eac ce ssto proiect
gutenbergtm electronic works se epa ragrap heb elowc th epro iectguten
ber glit eraryarc hive founda tionth ef oundati onorpglafow nsacompila
tionc  opy rightinth e colle

c  tio nofproi ectgutenb ergtmele ctronic worksnearl yal ltheindivi
du alwor ksin t hecollectio nareinthe pu bli cdomainint he uniteds
tatesifanin dividualwo rkisi  nthepu bli cdo mainintheu nited st ate
sandyouare loc at edi ntheun itedst at esw edonot claima  ri gh
ttoprevent youf ro mc opy ingdis tribut in gpe rformi ngdisp lay ing orc
reating de riv ativew orksba se do nth ework a slong as allrefe ren cest
oproiec tgutenbergar eremovedof courseweho pe thatyouw illsupport
thepr oiect gu ten berg tm miss io nof promotingf re eaccess toelectro
nic worksby  fr eelysh ar ingp roie ctg uten bergtmw ork sincomp
liancewitht heterms of thisagree ment forkee pi ngtheproie ctgut en
bergtm nameass ociated withthework youca ne asilycompl ywit hth eterm so
fthi sagreemen tby keeping thi sworkin thesameform atwi thitsattac hedf
ull proi  ect gut enberg tmlice nsew hen yoush ar eitw ithoutcha rg
ewithot hers dthe co pyr ight lawsof thep lac ewhereyo uare located
alsogovernw hatyouc ando wit hthis wo rkcopyr ightla wsin mostco

u  ntr iesareina cons ta nts tateo fchan gei fyo uareout side theuni
teds tat esc he ckth elaw sofy  ourcountr yina dd itio ntotheter mso ft
h isagreem entbe fo redown  lo adi ngc opyingd isp laying perfor mingd
ist ribu ti ngor creatin gd erivativ ew ork sbase do nthi sworkoran
yother proiectgute nbergtm workthefou ndationmak esnorepresen ta
tionscon cerningthe copyr ights ta tuso fany wo rki nanyc ountryo
utsidetheun ited  sta teseunless youha ve removedallrefer encestopro
iec tgutenber gethef ol low ings en ten cewitha ctiveli nks toorot
herimm

e  diatea cce ssto thefull pro iectgutenb er gtmlice nsemustap

p  ear prominent lywhenev eran ycopyo fapro ie ct guten bergtmwor
kanywo rk onw hich thephra seproiectgu tenberg appe arsorw ithwhichthe
phrasepr oie ctgu te n bergisa ssociatedis acce sse ddis pl ayedp erf
ormedv iewedco piedordis tribute dt hise booki sfo rtheus eofanyo
neanywher ea tnocostand wi thalmost norestric tionswhat soever
youmay co pyitgiveita

wayo rreus ei tun der the te rmsoft heproiec tg ut enbe rgl icen
seincl ud edwiththiseb ookoronlin  eat www gute nb ergo rg eifa ni
ndivi du alpro iec tgute nb erg tmelect ronicwork isderiv edfromth
epub licd omain do esnotc on tainanoticeindi

c  at in gthatitisp ostedwi thpermissio nofthecopy righ th olderth
ewor kca nbecop iedand dist rib utedtoa n yonein theuniteds tate sw it
houtpa ying anyfeesorc ha rge sifyouare redist rib utin gor pr ovidin
gac cesstoawork wi ththep hr ase proiec tguten bergass ociate dwi thor
ap pearing  on the wor kyoumustcomply ei therwitht herequ ir e ment
sofp ara graphs ethroug heorobtai npermissio nfor th euseofthe wo rka
ndth epr oiec tguten bergtm trad ema rkassetforth in paragraphs e
oreeifa n in dividu alproiectg ute nbe rgt me lec tron icw ork
isposte dwiththeper missionof th eco pyrig ht holderyour u se
a

n  dd is tributionm ustcomp lywithbothp aragraphse thro ug heanda
nyad dit ionalterms im pos edbytheco pyrigh thol der add itionalterms
will belink edto thep roiectgute n bergtml i cen sef orallworks
poste dwithth ep erm issionoft hecopy  rightholde rfoun datt he beginn
in gof thiswor kedonotunli nkordet ach orr emove theful lpro iec
tgutenberg tm lic enseterms fromth iswor ko ran yfilescon ta inin gapa

r  to fth iswork or anyoth er workas soc iate dwithpr oiectgutenb
ergtmed onotc opyd ispl aype rf orm distr ibuteorred i stri bu teth
isel ec tro nicwo rkor anypartoft hise lectron icworkwitho

u  tp rom inen tlydisp layingt hesentence se tforthinpara grap
hewithacti veli nk sor imme di atea ccesstothe full termsof
theproiectg utenbergtm lic enseeyou may conve rt toanddist r ibut
ethisw orkin an ybinaryco mpress ed mar kedu pnonp ro pri etaryor
proprietary forminc

l  udi nga nywordp ro ces singorhype rtet form ho wev erifyo
uprovideac cessto or distributecopi es ofaproiectg uten bergtmwor kin
afor matotherth an plainvani llaa  sciioro th erf ormatus edinth eo ff
icialversi onpost ed o ntheoff icialproiec tgut en b ergtmw ebsit ewww
guten bergorg youmu st atnoa dditio nalc os tfe eorexpen setothe
userpr ov ide acopyame ansofex portingacop yor amea nsofobtainingac
opy upon re qu estofthewo rkin its or iginalp la inv anil laascii o
roth e rform an yalternat e form at m ustin cl udetheful l proi ectg
utenber gt mli cens ea ssp ecifiedi npara graphee donot ch argea
feef  ora ccesstovi ewingd ispl ayingpe rfo rmin gcopyin gordistribu
tingany pr oiectgute nb ergtmwork s

u  nl ess youcom p lyw ith paragr ap heoreey oumaycharg
eareasonab lefeefo rc opiesoforpro vid ingacce sstoordistr ibuti
ngproi ect gutenb ergt melectron i cw o

r  ksp rov idedth a tyoupayaro yal tyf eeofof th eg rossprofi
tsyoud er iv efromtheuseo fproiec tgutenbergt mworkscalc ulate dusingth
emet

 hod you a lreadyu set oc  al cul ateyo urappli cab letaxe sthe
     fee iso we dtotheo wnerofthepr oiect gutenbergt mtrad ema rkbuth
     eha sagreed tod on ateroyalt iesu nderthispa ragra  pht oth ep
     roie ct gut enber gl ite raryarc hivefoundat ionroyalt ypa ym
     ent smustb ep aidwit hindaysfo llowi ngea chdateonw hi chy
     ouprepa reorarele gallyreq uiredto prepareyou  rperiod ictaretu
     rnsr oy alty paymen  tssh ouldbecle arly mark ed assuc han
     dsentto th epr oiectgu tenbergl it eraryar chiv efoundat ion
     atthead  dresssp ecifiedi nsecti on informa tionab ou tdon ati
     onst ot hep roiectg utenbergl iterarya rchivef oundationy ou pro
     videafu llrefundo fa nymoney  paidbyauser whono tifiesyou in
     wri tingorb yemailwit hindayso freceip tthatshedo

 esn otagree t othe termso ft hef ullpr oiec tg u tenb erg tmlicens
     eyo um ustrequ ir es uchau sertor  etur no rdestro yall cop
     ieso fth ework sp oss essed in aph ysic almediu manddiscont
     inueall  use ofan dallacc esst o othe rc opieso fp
     roiectg ute nbergt mw ork syoup rovideina cc o rdancewi thpara
     gra phfafullref und ofa ny mon eyp aidfor aw orkor arepla ce
     mentcop yifadefecti nthee

 lec tronicw or kisdiscove reda ndreporte d t oyou within da yso
     frece ipto fth e work yo u complywitha llot he r termso ft his
     agreementf orfr ee distributi ono fproiect gu ten bergtm  work
     se ifyouwi sh toc harg

 eaf eeordi stri but eapro iectg ut enbe rgtmelect ron icwo
     rkorgroupofw or ksondif ferentterms thana

r  es etf orth in thisag r eem en tyoumustob t ainperm issioninwri
tingfrombo thth ep roiec tg utenb er gliterary archi vefo und ati
onand mi chae lharttheo wne roft heproi ectgutenbe rg tmtrade mark
cont act thefoun dationass etforthi nsectio nbelowffpr oie ctguten
berg vol untee rs and employe esependcons iderablee  ffortto ide
ntifydocop yr igh trese ar chontra  nscri

b

e  andproo freadpubl icdomainwo rks increatin gthepr oiectgutenbe
rgtmco ll ectionde sp itethesee ffortspr oi ectgutenbe rgt melectron
icwork sandth emedi um onwhicht hey maybest oredmaycont
aindefects  suchasb utnot limited toincom pleteinaccu rateorcorr
uptda tat ran script io nerro rsac opy ri ghtoro the rintell
ectualp rope rt yin fri ngement ad efectiveor damageddis ko
rotherm ediu macomputervir usorco m putercode st hatda mageorcannot
bereadby yourequipmen t flimitedw ar rantydi scla im erofd amages e
ceptfort herig ht ofreplac ement orre fundde sc ribedi np arag ra
phft heproiect

g  utenber gliterar yarchivefo un dationt  heowne rof the proie
ct gutenbergtm tr ademar kandanyot he rpartydis t rib utingap
roiectgut enbergtm electro nicworkund ert hisag re eme ntdiscl
aimallliabi litytoyou for dam agesc ostsa ndepensesinc l udingle
galfeesyoua greethatyo uhav enore medi esfornegl igencest ric
tliabilit yb rea cho fwarran tyorb rea chofcont ractexcep tthos
epro  vid edinp arag rap hfyo ua greethat the foundation thetra
demarkown eranda ny distribu to runder th isagreem entwil lnotb
eliablet oy ouforactu a  ldi recti ndir ect consequent ial
punitiveo rinci den tal damageseven ifyou give noticeoft hepo ssi bi
lityof su chd ama geflim itedri ghtofrep lacementorref undifyou di
scoveradef ectinth isel ec tro nicw orkwit hi nda ysofreceivi ng ityo
ucanre

c  eiveare fundo ft hemoneyifan yy oupaid  fo rit bysendin g
awritt en expl anationtot hepe rsonyo  urec ei vedthewor kf rom ify
ourecei v edthew or kon aphys ic alm edi umyo umu st re turnthe m
ediumwi thyourwritt en exp lanati ont heperson ore ntit ytha  tp rov
idedyouw ith thed ef e ctivewor kmayel ect topr ovidea rep laceme ntco
pyin lieuofa refundifyou  rec eivedt he workel ectr onically the pers
ono rentitypr ovid ing ittoy ou maychoo s etogiveyoua seco nd oppo rt u
nityto  re cei vethewor kel ectr onicallyinlieu ofa refund if thesec
ondcopyis al so def ect iveyou ma ydem and a refund inwritingwi th
outfurt her oppo rtunitiestofit he prob le m fexcep  tf ort helimi tedr
ig htof replaceme nto rre fundse t forthi np aragrap hfthisw orkispr
ovidedtoyouas is wit hno otherwa

r  rantie sof any kindepr essor im pliedinclud in gbutno tli mited
to warrantie s ofme rcha nt ibilityo rf itn essf oran yp urpos
efsomestat es don otal lowdisc la imersof certainim pli edw arranti es
ortheeclus io norlimitationof ce rtainty pes ofd amagesi

f  anyd isclai me ror limit ationsetfor th inthisa greemen
tviolatest he law ofthestat ea pplicablet ot hisagre ement th eagreem
en tsh allbeinter pr etedtomake the maimu md iscl aimerorli mitation per
mit te dby theap plicablest at elaw theinvali dit yorunenfo rceab il
ityofanypro vi sion oft hisagre ementshall no tvoidthere mainingpr ov
isi onsfindemn ityyo uag  ree toindemnif ya ndholdthefoundat io nth
etrademar ko wner anyagento rempl oye eoft hef oundation anyoneprov

i  dingcopie  sof proie ct gutenberg tme lect ron icworksina cco
rdancewit hthis agr eemen ta ndanyvol un tee rsassociat edwith
theproduc tionpr om otionan ddistributi onofproiec tgute nb ergtmelect
roni cwor ksharmles sfr oma llliabilit ycostsande xpen ses includingl
egalfeest hat arisedirectl yo rindire ctlyfromany ofthefollo wingw
hichyoud oorc aus etooccura distr ibu tionofth isoranypr oiect gute
nber gtmwo rkbalter at ionmodific atio nor ad dit ionsordel etion sto an
yp roiec tg utenb e rgtmworkandc an ydef ec tyo ucauses ectioninfor
mati o naboutthem issionofproi ec tgutenber gt mproiectg ut enb
ergtmis synonymousw itht hef r eed istrib uti onofe


lectron    icworksinfo rmats rea dableby th ewidest varietyofco

mputers includingob so leteoldmid dlea ged andn ewcomputersi te
istsbecaus eofth ee ffortso fhundred so fvo luntee rsanddo na tionsfrom
peopleina llwalkso fli fevoluntee rsa ndf inancials  up portto
provide vo lun teerswi th theassis ta ncetheynee dis criticalt orea
chingp ro iec              

                                                               
                                                                 
                                                               
                                                                
                                                                     
                                                                   
                                                                     
                                                              
                                              


                                                                  
          

                                                                 
                                                         
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                     
                                                               
                                                                 
                                                 

                                                          
                                                            
                                                                
                                       
                                                            
                                                                 
                    

                                  
                       
                                 
                    

                                                              
                           

                                                                
                                                               
                                                                     
                                                                    
                                                                     
                                                         
                   

                                                                 
                                                               
                                                              
                                                                    
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                            
                                   

                                                                     
                                                                    
                                                                      
                                 

                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                              

                                                                 
                                                                  
                                                     
                                                    


                                                                  
     

                                                                     
                                                                    
                                                                 
                                                                 

                                                                 
                                                              
                                                                 
                                                           

                                                                       

                        

                                                            
                                                                 
                                                                
                                                          

                  
